  SHAKESPEARE_No.1:
  From fairest creatures we desire increase,
  That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
  But as the riper should by time decease,
  His tender heir might bear his memory:
  But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
  Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel,
  Making a famine where abundance lies,
  Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
  Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament,
  And only herald to the gaudy spring,
  Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
  And tender churl mak'st waste in niggarding:
    Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
    To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.2:
  When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
  And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
  Thy youth's proud livery so gazed on now,
  Will be a tatter'd weed of small worth held:
  Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,
  Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;
  To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes,
  Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.
  How much more praise deserv'd thy beauty's use,
  If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
  Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,'
  Proving his beauty by succession thine!
    This were to be new made when thou art old,
    And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.3:
  Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest
  Now is the time that face should form another;
  Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
  Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
  For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb
  Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
  Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
  Of his self-love to stop posterity?
  Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee
  Calls back the lovely April of her prime;
  So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
  Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
    But if thou live, remember'd not to be,
    Die single and thine image dies with thee.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.4:
  Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend
  Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy?
  Nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend,
  And being frank she lends to those are free:
  Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse
  The bounteous largess given thee to give?
  Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
  So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live?
  For having traffic with thy self alone,
  Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive:
  Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
  What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
    Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
    Which, used, lives th' executor to be.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.5:
  Those hours, that with gentle work did frame
  The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
  Will play the tyrants to the very same
  And that unfair which fairly doth excel;
  For never-resting time leads summer on
  To hideous winter, and confounds him there;
  Sap checked with frost, and lusty leaves quite gone,
  Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where:
  Then were not summer's distillation left,
  A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
  Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
  Nor it, nor no remembrance what it was:
    But flowers distill'd, though they with winter meet,
    Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.6:
  Then let not winter's ragged hand deface,
  In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd:
  Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
  With beauty's treasure ere it be self-kill'd.
  That use is not forbidden usury,
  Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
  That's for thy self to breed another thee,
  Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;
  Ten times thy self were happier than thou art,
  If ten of thine ten times refigur'd thee:
  Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
  Leaving thee living in posterity?
    Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair
    To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.7:
  Lo! in the orient when the gracious light
  Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
  Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
  Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
  And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill,
  Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
  Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
  Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
  But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,
  Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day,
  The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are
  From his low tract, and look another way:
    So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon:
    Unlook'd, on diest unless thou get a son.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.8:
  Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
  Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
  Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly,
  Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
  If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
  By unions married, do offend thine ear,
  They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
  In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.
  Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
  Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
  Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
  Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
    Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
    Sings this to thee: 'Thou single wilt prove none.'

  SHAKESPEARE_No.9:
  Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye,
  That thou consum'st thy self in single life?
  Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
  The world will wail thee like a makeless wife;
  The world will be thy widow and still weep
  That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
  When every private widow well may keep
  By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind:
  Look! what an unthrift in the world doth spend
  Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
  But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
  And kept unused the user so destroys it.
    No love toward others in that bosom sits
    That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.10:
  For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any,
  Who for thy self art so unprovident.
  Grant, if thou wilt, thou art belov'd of many,
  But that thou none lov'st is most evident:
  For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate,
  That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire,
  Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
  Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
  O! change thy thought, that I may change my mind:
  Shall hate be fairer lodg'd than gentle love?
  Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
  Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
    Make thee another self for love of me,
    That beauty still may live in thine or thee.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.11:
  As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st,
  In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
  And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st,
  Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest,
  Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase;
  Without this folly, age, and cold decay:
  If all were minded so, the times should cease
  And threescore year would make the world away.
  Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
  Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish:
  Look, whom she best endow'd, she gave thee more;
  Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
    She carv'd thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
    Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.12:
  When I do count the clock that tells the time,
  And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
  When I behold the violet past prime,
  And sable curls, all silvered o'er with white;
  When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
  Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
  And summer's green all girded up in sheaves,
  Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard,
  Then of thy beauty do I question make,
  That thou among the wastes of time must go,
  Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
  And die as fast as they see others grow;
    And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
    Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.13:
  O! that you were your self; but, love you are
  No longer yours, than you your self here live:
  Against this coming end you should prepare,
  And your sweet semblance to some other give:
  So should that beauty which you hold in lease
  Find no determination; then you were
  Yourself again, after yourself's decease,
  When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
  Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
  Which husbandry in honour might uphold,
  Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
  And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
    O! none but unthrifts. Dear my love, you know,
    You had a father: let your son say so.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.14:
  Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck;
  And yet methinks I have astronomy,
  But not to tell of good or evil luck,
  Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality;
  Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
  Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
  Or say with princes if it shall go well
  By oft predict that I in heaven find:
  But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
  And constant stars in them I read such art
  As 'Truth and beauty shall together thrive,
  If from thyself, to store thou wouldst convert';
    Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
    'Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.'

  SHAKESPEARE_No.15:
  When I consider every thing that grows
  Holds in perfection but a little moment,
  That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
  Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
  When I perceive that men as plants increase,
  Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky,
  Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
  And wear their brave state out of memory;
  Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
  Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
  Where wasteful Time debateth with decay
  To change your day of youth to sullied night,
    And all in war with Time for love of you,
    As he takes from you, I engraft you new.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.16:
  But wherefore do not you a mightier way
  Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?
  And fortify your self in your decay
  With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
  Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
  And many maiden gardens, yet unset,
  With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
  Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
  So should the lines of life that life repair,
  Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen,
  Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
  Can make you live your self in eyes of men.
    To give away yourself, keeps yourself still,
    And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.17:
  Who will believe my verse in time to come,
  If it were fill'd with your most high deserts?
  Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
  Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts.
  If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
  And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
  The age to come would say 'This poet lies;
  Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.'
  So should my papers, yellow'd with their age,
  Be scorn'd, like old men of less truth than tongue,
  And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage
  And stretched metre of an antique song:
    But were some child of yours alive that time,
    You should live twice,--in it, and in my rhyme.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.18:
  Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
  Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
  Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
  And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
  Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
  And often is his gold complexion dimm'd,
  And every fair from fair sometime declines,
  By chance, or nature's changing course untrimm'd:
  But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
  Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
  Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
  When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st,
    So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
    So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.19:
  Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
  And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
  Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
  And burn the long-liv'd phoenix, in her blood;
  Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
  And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
  To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
  But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
  O! carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
  Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen;
  Him in thy course untainted do allow
  For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
    Yet, do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong,
    My love shall in my verse ever live young.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.20:
  A woman's face with nature's own hand painted,
  Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion;
  A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
  With shifting change, as is false women's fashion:
  An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
  Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
  A man in hue all 'hues' in his controlling,
  Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
  And for a woman wert thou first created;
  Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting,
  And by addition me of thee defeated,
  By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
    But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure,
    Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.21:
  So is it not with me as with that Muse,
  Stirr'd by a painted beauty to his verse,
  Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
  And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
  Making a couplement of proud compare.
  With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems,
  With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare,
  That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
  O! let me, true in love, but truly write,
  And then believe me, my love is as fair
  As any mother's child, though not so bright
  As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air:
    Let them say more that like of hearsay well;
    I will not praise that purpose not to sell.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.22:
  My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
  So long as youth and thou are of one date;
  But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
  Then look I death my days should expiate.
  For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
  Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
  Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me:
  How can I then be elder than thou art?
  O! therefore love, be of thyself so wary
  As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
  Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
  As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
    Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain,
    Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.23:
  As an unperfect actor on the stage,
  Who with his fear is put beside his part,
  Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
  Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart;
  So I, for fear of trust, forget to say
  The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
  And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
  O'ercharg'd with burthen of mine own love's might.
  O! let my looks be then the eloquence
  And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
  Who plead for love, and look for recompense,
  More than that tongue that more hath more express'd.
    O! learn to read what silent love hath writ:
    To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.24:
  Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd,
  Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
  My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
  And perspective it is best painter's art.
  For through the painter must you see his skill,
  To find where your true image pictur'd lies,
  Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
  That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
  Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:
  Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
  Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
  Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
    Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
    They draw but what they see, know not the heart.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.25:
  Let those who are in favour with their stars
  Of public honour and proud titles boast,
  Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars
  Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
  Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
  But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
  And in themselves their pride lies buried,
  For at a frown they in their glory die.
  The painful warrior famoused for fight,
  After a thousand victories once foil'd,
  Is from the book of honour razed quite,
  And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd:
    Then happy I, that love and am belov'd,
    Where I may not remove nor be remov'd.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.26:
  Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage
  Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit;
  To thee I send this written embassage
  To witness duty, not to show my wit.
  Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
  May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it;
  But that I hope some good conceit of thine
  In thy soul's thought (all naked) will bestow it:
  Till whatsoever star that guides my moving,
  Points on me graciously with fair aspect,
  And puts apparel on my tattered loving,
  To show me worthy of thy sweet respect,
    Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee,
    Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.


 SHAKESPEARE_No.27:                   
  Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
  The dear respose for limbs with travel tired,
  But then begins a journey in my head
  To work my mind, when body's work's expired.
  For then my thoughts (from far where I abide)
  Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
  And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
  Looking on darkness which the blind do see.
  Save that my soul's imaginary sight
  Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
  Which like a jewel (hung in ghastly night)
  Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.
    Lo thus by day my limbs, by night my mind,
    For thee, and for my self, no quiet find.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.28:
  How can I then return in happy plight
  That am debarred the benefit of rest?
  When day's oppression is not eased by night,
  But day by night and night by day oppressed.
  And each (though enemies to either's reign)
  Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
  The one by toil, the other to complain
  How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
  I tell the day to please him thou art bright,
  And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
  So flatter I the swart-complexioned night,
  When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.
    But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
    And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger


                     SHAKESPEARE_No.29:
  When in disgrace with Fortune and men's eyes,
  I all alone beweep my outcast state,
  And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
  And look upon my self and curse my fate,
  Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
  Featured like him, like him with friends possessed,
  Desiring this man's art, and that man's scope,
  With what I most enjoy contented least,
  Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
  Haply I think on thee, and then my state,
  (Like to the lark at break of day arising
  From sullen earth) sings hymns at heaven's gate,
    For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings,
    That then I scorn to change my state with kings.


                     SHAKESPEARE_No.30:
  When to the sessions of sweet silent thought,
  I summon up remembrance of things past,
  I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
  And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste:
  Then can I drown an eye (unused to flow)
  For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
  And weep afresh love's long since cancelled woe,
  And moan th' expense of many a vanished sight.
  Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
  And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
  The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
  Which I new pay as if not paid before.
    But if the while I think on thee (dear friend)
    All losses are restored, and sorrows end.


                     SHAKESPEARE_No.31:
  Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
  Which I by lacking have supposed dead,
  And there reigns love and all love's loving parts,
  And all those friends which I thought buried.
  How many a holy and obsequious tear
  Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye,
  As interest of the dead, which now appear,
  But things removed that hidden in thee lie.
  Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
  Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
  Who all their parts of me to thee did give,
  That due of many, now is thine alone.
    Their images I loved, I view in thee,
    And thou (all they) hast all the all of me.


                     SHAKESPEARE_No.32:
  If thou survive my well-contented day,
  When that churl death my bones with dust shall cover
  And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
  These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover:
  Compare them with the bett'ring of the time,
  And though they be outstripped by every pen,
  Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
  Exceeded by the height of happier men.
  O then vouchsafe me but this loving thought,
  'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age,
  A dearer birth than this his love had brought
  To march in ranks of better equipage:
    But since he died and poets better prove,
    Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'.


                     SHAKESPEARE_No.33:
  Full many a glorious morning have I seen,
  Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
  Kissing with golden face the meadows green;
  Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy:
  Anon permit the basest clouds to ride,
  With ugly rack on his celestial face,
  And from the forlorn world his visage hide
  Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:
  Even so my sun one early morn did shine,
  With all triumphant splendour on my brow,
  But out alack, he was but one hour mine,
  The region cloud hath masked him from me now.
    Yet him for this, my love no whit disdaineth,
    Suns of the world may stain, when heaven's sun staineth.


                     SHAKESPEARE_No.34:
  Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
  And make me travel forth without my cloak,
  To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,
  Hiding thy brav'ry in their rotten smoke?
  'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
  To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
  For no man well of such a salve can speak,
  That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
  Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief,
  Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss,
  Th' offender's sorrow lends but weak relief
  To him that bears the strong offence's cross.
    Ah but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
    And they are rich, and ransom all ill deeds.


                     SHAKESPEARE_No.35:
  No more be grieved at that which thou hast done,
  Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud,
  Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
  And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
  All men make faults, and even I in this,
  Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
  My self corrupting salving thy amiss,
  Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are:
  For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense,
  Thy adverse party is thy advocate,
  And 'gainst my self a lawful plea commence:
  Such civil war is in my love and hate,
    That I an accessary needs must be,
    To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.


 SHAKESPEARE_No.36:
  Let me confess that we two must be twain,
  Although our undivided loves are one:
  So shall those blots that do with me remain,
  Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
  In our two loves there is but one respect,
  Though in our lives a separable spite,
  Which though it alter not love's sole effect,
  Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.
  I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
  Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
  Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
  Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
    But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
    As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.37:
  As a decrepit father takes delight,
  To see his active child do deeds of youth,
  So I, made lame by Fortune's dearest spite
  Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
  For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
  Or any of these all, or all, or more
  Entitled in thy parts, do crowned sit,
  I make my love engrafted to this store:
  So then I am not lame, poor, nor despised,
  Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give,
  That I in thy abundance am sufficed,
  And by a part of all thy glory live:
    Look what is best, that best I wish in thee,
    This wish I have, then ten times happy me.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.38:
  How can my muse want subject to invent
  While thou dost breathe that pour'st into my verse,
  Thine own sweet argument, too excellent,
  For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
  O give thy self the thanks if aught in me,
  Worthy perusal stand against thy sight,
  For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,
  When thou thy self dost give invention light?
  Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
  Than those old nine which rhymers invocate,
  And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
  Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
    If my slight muse do please these curious days,
    The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.39:
  O how thy worth with manners may I sing,
  When thou art all the better part of me?
  What can mine own praise to mine own self bring:
  And what is't but mine own when I praise thee?
  Even for this, let us divided live,
  And our dear love lose name of single one,
  That by this separation I may give:
  That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone:
  O absence what a torment wouldst thou prove,
  Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave,
  To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
  Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive.
    And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
    By praising him here who doth hence remain.


 SHAKESPEARE_No.40:
  Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all,
  What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
  No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call,
  All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more:
  Then if for my love, thou my love receivest,
  I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest,
  But yet be blamed, if thou thy self deceivest
  By wilful taste of what thy self refusest.
  I do forgive thy robbery gentle thief
  Although thou steal thee all my poverty:
  And yet love knows it is a greater grief
  To bear love's wrong, than hate's known injury.
    Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
    Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.


 SHAKESPEARE_No.41:
  Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
  When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
  Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits,
  For still temptation follows where thou art.
  Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won,
  Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed.
  And when a woman woos, what woman's son,
  Will sourly leave her till he have prevailed?
  Ay me, but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
  And chide thy beauty, and thy straying youth,
  Who lead thee in their riot even there
  Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:
    Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
    Thine by thy beauty being false to me.


 SHAKESPEARE_No.42:
  That thou hast her it is not all my grief,
  And yet it may be said I loved her dearly,
  That she hath thee is of my wailing chief,
  A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
  Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye,
  Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her,
  And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
  Suff'ring my friend for my sake to approve her.
  If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,
  And losing her, my friend hath found that loss,
  Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
  And both for my sake lay on me this cross,
    But here's the joy, my friend and I are one,
    Sweet flattery, then she loves but me alone.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.43:
  When most I wink then do mine eyes best see,
  For all the day they view things unrespected,
  But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
  And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.
  Then thou whose shadow shadows doth make bright
  How would thy shadow's form, form happy show,
  To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
  When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
  How would (I say) mine eyes be blessed made,
  By looking on thee in the living day,
  When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade,
  Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
    All days are nights to see till I see thee,
    And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.


 SHAKESPEARE_No.44:
  If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
  Injurious distance should not stop my way,
  For then despite of space I would be brought,
  From limits far remote, where thou dost stay,
  No matter then although my foot did stand
  Upon the farthest earth removed from thee,
  For nimble thought can jump both sea and land,
  As soon as think the place where he would be.
  But ah, thought kills me that I am not thought
  To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
  But that so much of earth and water wrought,
  I must attend, time's leisure with my moan.
    Receiving nought by elements so slow,
    But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.45:
  The other two, slight air, and purging fire,
  Are both with thee, wherever I abide,
  The first my thought, the other my desire,
  These present-absent with swift motion slide.
  For when these quicker elements are gone
  In tender embassy of love to thee,
  My life being made of four, with two alone,
  Sinks down to death, oppressed with melancholy.
  Until life's composition be recured,
  By those swift messengers returned from thee,
  Who even but now come back again assured,
  Of thy fair health, recounting it to me.
    This told, I joy, but then no longer glad,
    I send them back again and straight grow sad.


 SHAKESPEARE_No.46:
  Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war,
  How to divide the conquest of thy sight,
  Mine eye, my heart thy picture's sight would bar,
  My heart, mine eye the freedom of that right,
  My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,
  (A closet never pierced with crystal eyes)
  But the defendant doth that plea deny,
  And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
  To side this title is impanelled
  A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart,
  And by their verdict is determined
  The clear eye's moiety, and the dear heart's part.
    As thus, mine eye's due is thy outward part,
    And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.47:
  Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
  And each doth good turns now unto the other,
  When that mine eye is famished for a look,
  Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother;
  With my love's picture then my eye doth feast,
  And to the painted banquet bids my heart:
  Another time mine eye is my heart's guest,
  And in his thoughts of love doth share a part.
  So either by thy picture or my love,
  Thy self away, art present still with me,
  For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
  And I am still with them, and they with thee.
    Or if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
    Awakes my heart, to heart's and eye's delight.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.48:
  How careful was I when I took my way,
  Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
  That to my use it might unused stay
  From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
  But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
  Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,
  Thou best of dearest, and mine only care,
  Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
  Thee have I not locked up in any chest,
  Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
  Within the gentle closure of my breast,
  From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part,
    And even thence thou wilt be stol'n I fear,
    For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.49:
  Against that time (if ever that time come)
  When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
  When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
  Called to that audit by advised respects,
  Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass,
  And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,
  When love converted from the thing it was
  Shall reasons find of settled gravity;
  Against that time do I ensconce me here
  Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
  And this my hand, against my self uprear,
  To guard the lawful reasons on thy part,
    To leave poor me, thou hast the strength of laws,
    Since why to love, I can allege no cause.


   SHAKESPEARE_No.50:
  How heavy do I journey on the way,
  When what I seek (my weary travel's end)
  Doth teach that case and that repose to say
  'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend.'
  The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
  Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
  As if by some instinct the wretch did know
  His rider loved not speed being made from thee:
  The bloody spur cannot provoke him on,
  That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide,
  Which heavily he answers with a groan,
  More sharp to me than spurring to his side,
    For that same groan doth put this in my mind,
    My grief lies onward and my joy behind.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.51:
  Thus can my love excuse the slow offence,
  Of my dull bearer, when from thee I speed,
  From where thou art, why should I haste me thence?
  Till I return of posting is no need.
  O what excuse will my poor beast then find,
  When swift extremity can seem but slow?
  Then should I spur though mounted on the wind,
  In winged speed no motion shall I know,
  Then can no horse with my desire keep pace,
  Therefore desire (of perfect'st love being made)
  Shall neigh (no dull flesh) in his fiery race,
  But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade,
    Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow,
    Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.


 SHAKESPEARE_No.52:
  So am I as the rich whose blessed key,
  Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
  The which he will not every hour survey,
  For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
  Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
  Since seldom coming in that long year set,
  Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
  Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
  So is the time that keeps you as my chest
  Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
  To make some special instant special-blest,
  By new unfolding his imprisoned pride.
    Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
    Being had to triumph, being lacked to hope.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.53:
  What is your substance, whereof are you made,
  That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
  Since every one, hath every one, one shade,
  And you but one, can every shadow lend:
  Describe Adonis and the counterfeit,
  Is poorly imitated after you,
  On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
  And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
  Speak of the spring, and foison of the year,
  The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
  The other as your bounty doth appear,
  And you in every blessed shape we know.
    In all external grace you have some part,
    But you like none, none you for constant heart.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.54:
  O how much more doth beauty beauteous seem,
  By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
  The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
  For that sweet odour, which doth in it live:
  The canker blooms have full as deep a dye,
  As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
  Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly,
  When summer's breath their masked buds discloses:
  But for their virtue only is their show,
  They live unwooed, and unrespected fade,
  Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so,
  Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made:
    And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
    When that shall vade, by verse distills your truth.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.55:
  Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
  Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme,
  But you shall shine more bright in these contents
  Than unswept stone, besmeared with sluttish time.
  When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
  And broils root out the work of masonry,
  Nor Mars his sword, nor war's quick fire shall burn:
  The living record of your memory.
  'Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity
  Shall you pace forth, your praise shall still find room,
  Even in the eyes of all posterity
  That wear this world out to the ending doom.
    So till the judgment that your self arise,
    You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.56:
  Sweet love renew thy force, be it not said
  Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
  Which but to-day by feeding is allayed,
  To-morrow sharpened in his former might.
  So love be thou, although to-day thou fill
  Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness,
  To-morrow see again, and do not kill
  The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness:
  Let this sad interim like the ocean be
  Which parts the shore, where two contracted new,
  Come daily to the banks, that when they see:
  Return of love, more blest may be the view.
    Or call it winter, which being full of care,
    Makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.57:
  Being your slave what should I do but tend,
  Upon the hours, and times of your desire?
  I have no precious time at all to spend;
  Nor services to do till you require.
  Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
  Whilst I (my sovereign) watch the clock for you,
  Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
  When you have bid your servant once adieu.
  Nor dare I question with my jealous thought,
  Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
  But like a sad slave stay and think of nought
  Save where you are, how happy you make those.
    So true a fool is love, that in your will,
    (Though you do any thing) he thinks no ill.


    SHAKESPEARE_No.58:
  That god forbid, that made me first your slave,
  I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
  Or at your hand th' account of hours to crave,
  Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure.
  O let me suffer (being at your beck)
  Th' imprisoned absence of your liberty,
  And patience tame to sufferance bide each check,
  Without accusing you of injury.
  Be where you list, your charter is so strong,
  That you your self may privilage your time
  To what you will, to you it doth belong,
  Your self to pardon of self-doing crime.
    I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
    Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.59:
  If there be nothing new, but that which is,
  Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
  Which labouring for invention bear amis
  The second burthen of a former child!
  O that record could with a backward look,
  Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
  Show me your image in some antique book,
  Since mind at first in character was done.
  That I might see what the old world could say,
  To this composed wonder of your frame,
  Whether we are mended, or whether better they,
  Or whether revolution be the same.
    O sure I am the wits of former days,
    To subjects worse have given admiring praise.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.60:
  Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
  So do our minutes hasten to their end,
  Each changing place with that which goes before,
  In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
  Nativity once in the main of light,
  Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crowned,
  Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight,
  And Time that gave, doth now his gift confound.
  Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth,
  And delves the parallels in beauty's brow,
  Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
  And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow.
    And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand
    Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.


   SHAKESPEARE_No.61:
  Is it thy will, thy image should keep open
  My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
  Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
  While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
  Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
  So far from home into my deeds to pry,
  To find out shames and idle hours in me,
  The scope and tenure of thy jealousy?
  O no, thy love though much, is not so great,
  It is my love that keeps mine eye awake,
  Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
  To play the watchman ever for thy sake.
    For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
    From me far off, with others all too near.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.62:
  Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye,
  And all my soul, and all my every part;
  And for this sin there is no remedy,
  It is so grounded inward in my heart.
  Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
  No shape so true, no truth of such account,
  And for my self mine own worth do define,
  As I all other in all worths surmount.
  But when my glass shows me my self indeed
  beated and chopt with tanned antiquity,
  Mine own self-love quite contrary I read:
  Self, so self-loving were iniquity.
    'Tis thee (my self) that for my self I praise,
    Painting my age with beauty of thy days.


 SHAKESPEARE_No.63:
  Against my love shall be as I am now
  With Time's injurious hand crushed and o'erworn,
  When hours have drained his blood and filled his brow
  With lines and wrinkles, when his youthful morn
  Hath travelled on to age's steepy night,
  And all those beauties whereof now he's king
  Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight,
  Stealing away the treasure of his spring:
  For such a time do I now fortify
  Against confounding age's cruel knife,
  That he shall never cut from memory
  My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life.
    His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
    And they shall live, and he in them still green.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.64:
  When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced
  The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age,
  When sometime lofty towers I see down-rased,
  And brass eternal slave to mortal rage.
  When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
  Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
  And the firm soil win of the watery main,
  Increasing store with loss, and loss with store.
  When I have seen such interchange of State,
  Or state it self confounded, to decay,
  Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate
  That Time will come and take my love away.
    This thought is as a death which cannot choose
    But weep to have, that which it fears to lose.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.65:
  Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
  But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
  How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
  Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
  O how shall summer's honey breath hold out,
  Against the wrackful siege of batt'ring days,
  When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
  Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays?
  O fearful meditation, where alack,
  Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
  Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back,
  Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
    O none, unless this miracle have might,
    That in black ink my love may still shine bright.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.66:
  Tired with all these for restful death I cry,
  As to behold desert a beggar born,
  And needy nothing trimmed in jollity,
  And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
  And gilded honour shamefully misplaced,
  And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
  And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
  And strength by limping sway disabled
  And art made tongue-tied by authority,
  And folly (doctor-like) controlling skill,
  And simple truth miscalled simplicity,
  And captive good attending captain ill.
    Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
    Save that to die, I leave my love alone.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.67:
  Ah wherefore with infection should he live,
  And with his presence grace impiety,
  That sin by him advantage should achieve,
  And lace it self with his society?
  Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
  And steal dead seeming of his living hue?
  Why should poor beauty indirectly seek,
  Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
  Why should he live, now nature bankrupt is,
  Beggared of blood to blush through lively veins,
  For she hath no exchequer now but his,
  And proud of many, lives upon his gains?
    O him she stores, to show what wealth she had,
    In days long since, before these last so bad.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.68:
  Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
  When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
  Before these bastard signs of fair were born,
  Or durst inhabit on a living brow:
  Before the golden tresses of the dead,
  The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
  To live a second life on second head,
  Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay:
  In him those holy antique hours are seen,
  Without all ornament, it self and true,
  Making no summer of another's green,
  Robbing no old to dress his beauty new,
    And him as for a map doth Nature store,
    To show false Art what beauty was of yore.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.69:
  Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view,
  Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend:
  All tongues (the voice of souls) give thee that due,
  Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
  Thy outward thus with outward praise is crowned,
  But those same tongues that give thee so thine own,
  In other accents do this praise confound
  By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
  They look into the beauty of thy mind,
  And that in guess they measure by thy deeds,
  Then churls their thoughts (although their eyes were kind)
  To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:
    But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,
    The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.70:
  That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect,
  For slander's mark was ever yet the fair,
  The ornament of beauty is suspect,
  A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
  So thou be good, slander doth but approve,
  Thy worth the greater being wooed of time,
  For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
  And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
  Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days,
  Either not assailed, or victor being charged,
  Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
  To tie up envy, evermore enlarged,
    If some suspect of ill masked not thy show,
    Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.71:
  No longer mourn for me when I am dead,
  Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
  Give warning to the world that I am fled
  From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell:
  Nay if you read this line, remember not,
  The hand that writ it, for I love you so,
  That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
  If thinking on me then should make you woe.
  O if (I say) you look upon this verse,
  When I (perhaps) compounded am with clay,
  Do not so much as my poor name rehearse;
  But let your love even with my life decay.
    Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
    And mock you with me after I am gone.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.72:
  O lest the world should task you to recite,
  What merit lived in me that you should love
  After my death (dear love) forget me quite,
  For you in me can nothing worthy prove.
  Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
  To do more for me than mine own desert,
  And hang more praise upon deceased I,
  Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
  O lest your true love may seem false in this,
  That you for love speak well of me untrue,
  My name be buried where my body is,
  And live no more to shame nor me, nor you.
    For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
    And so should you, to love things nothing worth.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.73:
  That time of year thou mayst in me behold,
  When yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang
  Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
  Bare ruined choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
  In me thou seest the twilight of such day,
  As after sunset fadeth in the west,
  Which by and by black night doth take away,
  Death's second self that seals up all in rest.
  In me thou seest the glowing of such fire,
  That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
  As the death-bed, whereon it must expire,
  Consumed with that which it was nourished by.
    This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
    To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.74:
  But be contented when that fell arrest,
  Without all bail shall carry me away,
  My life hath in this line some interest,
  Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
  When thou reviewest this, thou dost review,
  The very part was consecrate to thee,
  The earth can have but earth, which is his due,
  My spirit is thine the better part of me,
  So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
  The prey of worms, my body being dead,
  The coward conquest of a wretch's knife,
  Too base of thee to be remembered,
    The worth of that, is that which it contains,
    And that is this, and this with thee remains.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.75:
  So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
  Or as sweet-seasoned showers are to the ground;
  And for the peace of you I hold such strife
  As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found.
  Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon
  Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure,
  Now counting best to be with you alone,
  Then bettered that the world may see my pleasure,
  Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
  And by and by clean starved for a look,
  Possessing or pursuing no delight
  Save what is had, or must from you be took.
    Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
    Or gluttoning on all, or all away.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.76:
  Why is my verse so barren of new pride?
  So far from variation or quick change?
  Why with the time do I not glance aside
  To new-found methods, and to compounds strange?
  Why write I still all one, ever the same,
  And keep invention in a noted weed,
  That every word doth almost tell my name,
  Showing their birth, and where they did proceed?
  O know sweet love I always write of you,
  And you and love are still my argument:
  So all my best is dressing old words new,
  Spending again what is already spent:
    For as the sun is daily new and old,
    So is my love still telling what is told.


   SHAKESPEARE_No.77:
  Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
  Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste,
  These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
  And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste.
  The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show,
  Of mouthed graves will give thee memory,
  Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know,
  Time's thievish progress to eternity.
  Look what thy memory cannot contain,
  Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
  Those children nursed, delivered from thy brain,
  To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
    These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
    Shall profit thee, and much enrich thy book.


   SHAKESPEARE_No.78:
  So oft have I invoked thee for my muse,
  And found such fair assistance in my verse,
  As every alien pen hath got my use,
  And under thee their poesy disperse.
  Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing,
  And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
  Have added feathers to the learned's wing,
  And given grace a double majesty.
  Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
  Whose influence is thine, and born of thee,
  In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
  And arts with thy sweet graces graced be.
    But thou art all my art, and dost advance
    As high as learning, my rude ignorance.


   SHAKESPEARE_No.79:
  Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
  My verse alone had all thy gentle grace,
  But now my gracious numbers are decayed,
  And my sick muse doth give an other place.
  I grant (sweet love) thy lovely argument
  Deserves the travail of a worthier pen,
  Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent,
  He robs thee of, and pays it thee again,
  He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word,
  From thy behaviour, beauty doth he give
  And found it in thy cheek: he can afford
  No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.
    Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
    Since what he owes thee, thou thy self dost pay.


   SHAKESPEARE_No.80:
  O how I faint when I of you do write,
  Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
  And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
  To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame.
  But since your worth (wide as the ocean is)
  The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
  My saucy bark (inferior far to his)
  On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
  Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
  Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride,
  Or (being wrecked) I am a worthless boat,
  He of tall building, and of goodly pride.
    Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
    The worst was this, my love was my decay.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.81:
  Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
  Or you survive when I in earth am rotten,
  From hence your memory death cannot take,
  Although in me each part will be forgotten.
  Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
  Though I (once gone) to all the world must die,
  The earth can yield me but a common grave,
  When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie,
  Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
  Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read,
  And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse,
  When all the breathers of this world are dead,
    You still shall live (such virtue hath my pen)
    Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.82:
  I grant thou wert not married to my muse,
  And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
  The dedicated words which writers use
  Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
  Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
  Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,
  And therefore art enforced to seek anew,
  Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.
  And do so love, yet when they have devised,
  What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
  Thou truly fair, wert truly sympathized,
  In true plain words, by thy true-telling friend.
    And their gross painting might be better used,
    Where cheeks need blood, in thee it is abused.


 SHAKESPEARE_No.83:
  I never saw that you did painting need,
  And therefore to your fair no painting set,
  I found (or thought I found) you did exceed,
  That barren tender of a poet's debt:
  And therefore have I slept in your report,
  That you your self being extant well might show,
  How far a modern quill doth come too short,
  Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.
  This silence for my sin you did impute,
  Which shall be most my glory being dumb,
  For I impair not beauty being mute,
  When others would give life, and bring a tomb.
    There lives more life in one of your fair eyes,
    Than both your poets can in praise devise.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.84:
  Who is it that says most, which can say more,
  Than this rich praise, that you alone, are you?
  In whose confine immured is the store,
  Which should example where your equal grew.
  Lean penury within that pen doth dwell,
  That to his subject lends not some small glory,
  But he that writes of you, if he can tell,
  That you are you, so dignifies his story.
  Let him but copy what in you is writ,
  Not making worse what nature made so clear,
  And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
  Making his style admired every where.
    You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
    Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.


    SHAKESPEARE_No.85:
  My tongue-tied muse in manners holds her still,
  While comments of your praise richly compiled,
  Reserve their character with golden quill,
  And precious phrase by all the Muses filed.
  I think good thoughts, whilst other write good words,
  And like unlettered clerk still cry Amen,
  To every hymn that able spirit affords,
  In polished form of well refined pen.
  Hearing you praised, I say 'tis so, 'tis true,
  And to the most of praise add something more,
  But that is in my thought, whose love to you
  (Though words come hindmost) holds his rank before,
    Then others, for the breath of words respect,
    Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.86:
  Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
  Bound for the prize of (all too precious) you,
  That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
  Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
  Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
  Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
  No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
  Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
  He nor that affable familiar ghost
  Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
  As victors of my silence cannot boast,
  I was not sick of any fear from thence.
    But when your countenance filled up his line,
    Then lacked I matter, that enfeebled mine.


   SHAKESPEARE_No.87:
  Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
  And like enough thou know'st thy estimate,
  The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing:
  My bonds in thee are all determinate.
  For how do I hold thee but by thy granting,
  And for that riches where is my deserving?
  The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
  And so my patent back again is swerving.
  Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing,
  Or me to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking,
  So thy great gift upon misprision growing,
  Comes home again, on better judgement making.
    Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter,
    In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.


   SHAKESPEARE_No.88:
  When thou shalt be disposed to set me light,
  And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
  Upon thy side, against my self I'll fight,
  And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn:
  With mine own weakness being best acquainted,
  Upon thy part I can set down a story
  Of faults concealed, wherein I am attainted:
  That thou in losing me, shalt win much glory:
  And I by this will be a gainer too,
  For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
  The injuries that to my self I do,
  Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
    Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
    That for thy right, my self will bear all wrong.


   SHAKESPEARE_No.89:
  Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
  And I will comment upon that offence,
  Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt:
  Against thy reasons making no defence.
  Thou canst not (love) disgrace me half so ill,
  To set a form upon desired change,
  As I'll my self disgrace, knowing thy will,
  I will acquaintance strangle and look strange:
  Be absent from thy walks and in my tongue,
  Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
  Lest I (too much profane) should do it wrong:
  And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
    For thee, against my self I'll vow debate,
    For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.90:
  Then hate me when thou wilt, if ever, now,
  Now while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
  join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
  And do not drop in for an after-loss:
  Ah do not, when my heart hath 'scaped this sorrow,
  Come in the rearward of a conquered woe,
  Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
  To linger out a purposed overthrow.
  If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
  When other petty griefs have done their spite,
  But in the onset come, so shall I taste
  At first the very worst of fortune's might.
    And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
    Compared with loss of thee, will not seem so.


 SHAKESPEARE_No.91:
  Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
  Some in their wealth, some in their body's force,
  Some in their garments though new-fangled ill:
  Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse.
  And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
  Wherein it finds a joy above the rest,
  But these particulars are not my measure,
  All these I better in one general best.
  Thy love is better than high birth to me,
  Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' costs,
  Of more delight than hawks and horses be:
  And having thee, of all men's pride I boast.
    Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take,
    All this away, and me most wretchcd make.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.92:
  But do thy worst to steal thy self away,
  For term of life thou art assured mine,
  And life no longer than thy love will stay,
  For it depends upon that love of thine.
  Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
  When in the least of them my life hath end,
  I see, a better state to me belongs
  Than that, which on thy humour doth depend.
  Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
  Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie,
  O what a happy title do I find,
  Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
    But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
    Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.93:
  So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
  Like a deceived husband, so love's face,
  May still seem love to me, though altered new:
  Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place.
  For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
  Therefore in that I cannot know thy change,
  In many's looks, the false heart's history
  Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange.
  But heaven in thy creation did decree,
  That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell,
  Whate'er thy thoughts, or thy heart's workings be,
  Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell.
    How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
    If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.94:
  They that have power to hurt, and will do none,
  That do not do the thing, they most do show,
  Who moving others, are themselves as stone,
  Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow:
  They rightly do inherit heaven's graces,
  And husband nature's riches from expense,
  Tibey are the lords and owners of their faces,
  Others, but stewards of their excellence:
  The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
  Though to it self, it only live and die,
  But if that flower with base infection meet,
  The basest weed outbraves his dignity:
    For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds,
    Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds.


   SHAKESPEARE_No.95:
  How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame,
  Which like a canker in the fragrant rose,
  Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
  O in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!
  That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
  (Making lascivious comments on thy sport)
  Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise,
  Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.
  O what a mansion have those vices got,
  Which for their habitation chose out thee,
  Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot,
  And all things turns to fair, that eyes can see!
    Take heed (dear heart) of this large privilege,
    The hardest knife ill-used doth lose his edge.


   SHAKESPEARE_No.96:
  Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness,
  Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport,
  Both grace and faults are loved of more and less:
  Thou mak'st faults graces, that to thee resort:
  As on the finger of a throned queen,
  The basest jewel will be well esteemed:
  So are those errors that in thee are seen,
  To truths translated, and for true things deemed.
  How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
  If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
  How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
  if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
    But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
    As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.97:
  How like a winter hath my absence been
  From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
  What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
  What old December's bareness everywhere!
  And yet this time removed was summer's time,
  The teeming autumn big with rich increase,
  Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
  Like widowed wombs after their lords' decease:
  Yet this abundant issue seemed to me
  But hope of orphans, and unfathered fruit,
  For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
  And thou away, the very birds are mute.
    Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer,
    That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.98:
  From you have I been absent in the spring,
  When proud-pied April (dressed in all his trim)
  Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing:
  That heavy Saturn laughed and leaped with him.
  Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
  Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
  Could make me any summer's story tell:
  Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
  Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
  Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose,
  They were but sweet, but figures of delight:
  Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
    Yet seemed it winter still, and you away,
    As with your shadow I with these did play.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.99:
  The forward violet thus did I chide,
  Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
  If not from my love's breath? The purple pride
  Which on thy soft check for complexion dwells,
  In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed.
  The lily I condemned for thy hand,
  And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair,
  The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
  One blushing shame, another white despair:
  A third nor red, nor white, had stol'n of both,
  And to his robbery had annexed thy breath,
  But for his theft in pride of all his growth
  A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
    More flowers I noted, yet I none could see,
    But sweet, or colour it had stol'n from thee.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.100:
  Where art thou Muse that thou forget'st so long,
  To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
  Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
  Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
  Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem,
  In gentle numbers time so idly spent,
  Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem,
  And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
  Rise resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey,
  If time have any wrinkle graven there,
  If any, be a satire to decay,
  And make time's spoils despised everywhere.
    Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life,
    So thou prevent'st his scythe, and crooked knife.

DE_VERE_No.1:
1 The labouring man that tills the fertile soil
2 And reaps the harvest fruit hath not indeed
3 The gain, but pain, and if for all his toil
4 He gets the straw, the Lord will have the seed.
5 The Manchet fine falls not unto his share,
6 On coarsest cheat his hungry stomach feeds.
7 The Landlord doth possess the finest fare;
8 He pulls the flowers, the other plucks but weeds.
9 The mason poor, that builds the Lordly halls,
10 Dwells not in them, they are for high degree;
11 His Cottage is compact in paper walls,
12 And not with brick or stone as others be.
13 The idle Drone that labours not at all
14 Sucks up the sweet of honey from the Bee.
15 Who worketh most, to their share least doth fall;
16 With due desert reward will never be.
17 The swiftest Hare unto the Mastiff slow
18 Oft times doth fall to him as for a prey;
19 The Greyhound thereby doth miss his game we know
20 For which he made such speedy haste away.
21 So he that takes the pain to pen the book
22 Reaps not the gifts of goodly golden Muse,
23 But those gain that who on the work shall look,
24 And from the sour the sweet by skill doth choose.
25 For he that beats the bush the bird not gets,
26 But who sits still, and holdeth fast the nets. 

DE_VERE_No.2:
1 Even as the wax doth melt, or dew consume away
2 Before the Sun, so I, behold, through careful thoughts decay,
3 For my best luck leads me to such sinister state
4 That I do waste with others love, that hath myself in hate,
5 And he that beats the bush, the wished bird not gets,
6 But such I see as sitteth still, and holds the fowling nets.
7 The Drone more honey sucks, that laboureth not at all,
8 Than doth the Bee, to whose most pain least pleasure doth befall;
9 The Gardener sows the seeds whereof the flowers do grow,
10 And others yet do gather them that took less pain, I know;
11 So I the pleasant grape have pulled from the Vine,
12 And yet I languish in great thirst while others drink the wine.
13 Thus like a woeful wight I wove my web of woe;
14 The more I would weed out my cares, the more they seem to grow.
15 The which betokeneth hope, forsaken is of me,
16 That with the careful culver climbs the worn and withered tree
17 To entertain my thoughts, and there my hap to moan,
18 That never am less idle, lo, than when I am alone.

DE_VERE_No.3:
1 A Crown of Bays shall that man wear
2 That triumphs over me,
3 For Black and Tawny will I wear,
4 Which mourning colours be.
5 The more I followed on, the more she fled away,
6 As Daphne did full long agone, Apollos wishful prey;
7 The more my plaints resound, the less she pities me;
8 The more I sought, the less I found that mine she meant to be.
9 Melpomene, alas, with doleful tunes help then,
10 And sing (bis), woe worth on me, forsaken man.
11 Then Daphnes Bays shall that man wear that triumphs over me,
12 For Black and Tawny will I wear, which mourning colours be.
13 Drown me you trickling tears, you wailful wights of woe;
14 Come help these hands to rent my hairs, my rueful haps to show
15 On whom the scorching flames of love doth feed you see;
16 Ah lalantida, my dear dame hath thus tormented me.
17 Wherefore you Muses nine, with doleful tunes help then,
18 And sing (bis), woe worth on me, forsaken man.
19 Then Daphnes Bays shall that man wear that triumphs over me,
20 For Black and Tawny will I wear, which mourning colours be.
21 An Anchors life to lead, with nails to scratch my grave,
22 Where earthly Worms on me shall feed, is all the joys I crave,
23 And hide myself from shame, sith that mine eyes do see,
24 Ah lalantida, my dear dame hath thus tormented me.
25 And all that present be, with doleful tunes help then,
26 And sing (bis), woe worth on me, forsaken man.

DE_VERE_No.4:
1 Framed in the front of forlorn hope, past all recovery,
2 I stayless stand tabide the shock of shame and infamy.
3 My life, through lingering long, is lodged in lair of loathsome ways,
4 My death delayed to keep from life the harm of hapless days.
5 My sprites, my heart, my wit and force in deep distress are drowned;
6 The only loss of my good name is of these griefs the ground.
7 And since my mind, my wit, my head, my voice and tongue are weak
8 To utter, move, devise, conceive, sound forth, declare and speak
9 Such piercing plaints as answer might, or would, my woeful case,
10 Help crave I must, and crave I will, with tears upon my face
11 Of all that may in heaven or hell, in earth or air, be found
12 To wail with me this loss of mine, as of these griefs the ground.
13 Help gods, help saints, help sprites and powers that in the heaven do dwell,
14 Help ye that are to wail, ay wont, ye howling hounds of hell,
15 Help man, help beasts, help birds and worms that on the earth doth toil,
16 Help fish, help fowl that flocks and feeds upon the salt sea soil,
17 Help echo that in air doth flee, shrill voices to resound
18 To wail this loss of my good name, as of these griefs the ground.

DE_VERE_No.5:
1 I am not as I seem to be,
2 Nor when I smile I am not glad,
3 A thrall although you count me free
4 I, most in mirth, most pensive-sad;
5 I smile to shade my bitter spite,
6 As Hannibal, that saw in sight
7 His country soil, with Carthage town,
8 By Roman force defaced down.
9 And Caesar, that presented was
10 With noble Pompeys princely head,
11 As twere some judge to rule the case,
12 A flood of tears he seemed to shed;
13 Although indeed it sprung of joy,
14 Yet others thought it was annoy;
15 Thus contraries be used, I find,
16 Of wise to cloak the covert mind.
17 I Hannibal, that smiles for grief,
18 And let you Caesars tears suffice,
19 The one that laughs at his mischief,
20 The other all for joy that cries;
21 I smile to see me scorned so,
22 You weep for joy to see me woe,
23 And I a heart by love slain dead
24 Presents, in place of Pompeys head.
25 O cruel hap and hard estate
26 That forceth me to love my foe,
27 Accursed by so foul a fate
28 My choice for to prefix it so,
29 So long to fight with secret sore,
30 And find no secret salve therefor;
31 Some purge their pain by plaint, I find,
32 But I in vain do breathe my wind.

DE_VERE_No.6:
1 If care or skill could conquer vain desire,
2 Or reasons reins my strong affection stay,
3 Then should my sighs to quiet breast retire,
4 And shun such signs as secret thoughts bewray;
5 Uncomely love, which now lurks in my breast,
6 Should cease my grief, through wisdoms power oppressed.
7 But who can leave to look on Venus face,
8 Or yieldeth not to Junos high estate?
9 What wit so wise as gives not Pallas place?
10 These virtues rare each God did yield a mate,
11 Save her alone who yet on earth doth reign,
12 Whose beautys string no Gods can well distrain.
13 What worldly wight can hope for heavenly hire
14 When only sighs must make his secret moan?
15 A silent suit doth seld to Grace aspire;
16 My hapless hap doth roll the restless stone;
17 Yet Phoebe fair disdained the heavens above,
18 To joy on earth her poor Endymions love.
19 Rare is reward where none can justly crave,
20 For chance is choice where reason makes no claim;
21 Yet luck sometimes despairing souls doth save:
22 A happy star made Gyges joy attain;
23 A slavish smith of rude and rascal race
24 Found means in time to gain a Goddess grace.
25 Then lofty Love thy sacred sails advance;
26 My seething seas shall flow with streams of tears.
27 Amidst disdain drive forth my doleful chance;
28 A valiant mind no deadly danger fears.
29 Who loves aloft and sets his heart on high,
30 Deserves no pain, though he do pine and die

DE_VERE_No.7:
1 My meaning is to work what wonders love hath wrought,
2 Wherewith I muse why men of wit have love so dearly bought;
3 For love is worse than hate, and eke more harm hath done:
4 Record I take of those that rede of Paris, Priams son.
5 It seemed the God of sleep had mazed so much his wits
6 When he refused wit for love, which cometh but by fits;
7 But why accuse I him, whom earth hath covered long?
8 There be of his posterity alive, I do him wrong.
9 Whom I might well condemn to be a cruel judge
10 Unto myself, who hath the crime in others that I grudge.

DE_VERE_No.8:
1 The lively lark stretched forth her wing,
2 The messenger of morning bright,
3 And with her cheerful voice did sing
4 The days approach, discharging night,
5 When that Aurora, blushing red,
6 Descried the guilt of Thetis bed.
7 I went abroad to take the air,
8 And in the meads I met a knight,
9 Clad in carnation colour fair;
10 I did salute this gentle wight,
11 Of him I did his name inquire.
12 He sighed, and said he was desire.
13 Desire I did desire to stay,
14 Awhile with him I craved to talk;
15 The courteous knight said me no nay,
16 But hand in hand with me did walk.
17 Then of desire I asked again
18 What thing did please and what did pain?
19 He smiled, and thus he answered then,
20 Desire can have no greater pain
21 Than for to see another man
22 That he desireth to obtain;
23 Nor greater joy can be than this,
24 Than to enjoy that others miss.

DE_VERE_No.9:
1 The trickling tears that fall along my cheeks,
2 The secret sighs that show my inward grief,
3 The present pains perforce that love ay seeks,
4 Bid me renew my cares without relief
5 In woeful song, in dole display,
6 My pensive heart for to bewray.
7 Bewray thy grief, thou woeful heart, with speed,
8 Resign thy voice to her that caused thy woe;
9 With irksome cries bewail thy late-done deed,
10 For she thou lovest is sure thy mortal foe,
11 And help for thee there is none sure,
12 But still in pain thou must endure.
13 The stricken Deer hath help to heal his wound,
14 The haggard hawk with toil is made full tame,
15 The strongest tower the Cannon lays on ground,
16 The wisest wit that ever had the fame
17 Was thrall to Love by Cupids sleights;
18 Then weigh my case with equal weights.
19 She is my joy, she is my care and woe,
20 She is my pain, she is my ease therefor,
21 She is my death, she is my life also,
22 She is my salve, she is my wounded sore;
23 In fine, she hath the hand and knife
24 That may both save and end my life.
25 And shall I live on earth to be her thrall?
26 And shall I sue and serve her all in vain?
27 And shall I kiss the steps that she lets fall?
28 And shall I pray the gods to keep the pain
29 From her, that is so cruel still?
30 No, no, on her work all your will.
31 And let her feel the power of all your might,
32 And let her have her most desire with speed,
33 And let her pine away both day and night,
34 And let her moan, and none lament her need,
35 And let all those that shall her see
36 Despise her state, and pity me.

DE_VERE_No.10:
1 Fain would I sing but fury makes me fret,
2 And rage hath sworn to seek revenge of wrong;
3 My mazed mind in malice so is set
4 As death shall daunt my deadly dolours long.
5 Patience perforce is such a pinching pain,
6 As die I will or suffer wrong again.
7 I am no sot to suffer such abuse
8 As doth bereave my heart of his delight,
9 Nor will I frame myself to such as use
10 With calm consent to suffer such despite.
11 No quiet sleep shall once possess mine eye,
12 Till wit have wrought his will on injury.
13 My heart shall fail and hand shall lose his force,
14 But some device shall pay despite his due;
15 And fury shall consume my careful corse,
16 Or raze the ground whereon my sorrow grew.
17 Lo, thus in rage of ruthful mind refused,
18 I rest revenged of whom I am abused.

DE_VERE_No.11:
1 When wert thou born, desire?
2 In pomp and prime of May.
3 By whom, sweet boy, wert thou begot?
4 By good conceit, men say.
5 Tell me, who was thy nurse?
6 Fresh youth in sugared joy.
7 What was thy meat and daily food?
8 Sad sighs with great annoy.
9 What hadst thou then to drink?
10 Unfeigned lovers tears.
11 What cradle wert thou rocked in?
12 In hope devoid of fears.
13 What brought thee then asleep?
14 Sweet speech, that liked me best.
15 And where is now thy dwelling-place?
16 In gentle hearts I rest.
17 Doth company displease?
18 It doth in many a one.
19 Where would desire then choose to be?
20 He likes to muse alone.
21 What feedeth most your sight?
22 To gaze on favour still.
23 What findest thou most to be thy foe?
24 Disdain of my goodwill.
25 Will ever age or death
26 Bring thee unto decay?
27 No, no, desire both lives and dies
28 Ten thousand times a day.

DE_VERE_No.12:
1 Winged with desire, I seek to mount on high,
2 Clogged with mishap yet am I kept full low;
3 Who seeks to live and finds the way to die,
4 Sith comfort ebbs, and cares do daily flow,
5 But sad despair would have me to retire,
6 When smiling hope sets forward my desire.
7 I still do toil and never am at rest,
8 Enjoying least when I do covet most;
9 With weary thoughts are my green years oppressed,
10 To danger drawn from my desired coast;
11 Now crazed with Care, then haled up with Hope,
12 With world at will yet wanting wished scope.
13 I like in heart, yet dare not say I love,
14 And looks alone do lend me chief relief.
15 I dwelt sometimes at rest yet must remove,
16 With feigned joy I hide my secret grief.
17 I would possess yet needs must flee the place
18 Where I do seek to win my chiefest grace.
19 Lo, thus I live twixt fear and comfort tossed,
20 With least abode where best I feel content;
21 I seld resort where I should settle most,
22 My sliding times too soon with her are spent;
23 I hover high and soar where Hope doth tower,
24 Yet froward Fate defers my happy hour.
25 I live abroad but still in secret grief,
26 Then least alone when most I seem to lurk;
27 I speak of peace, and live in endless strife,
28 And when I play then are my thoughts at work;
29 In person far that am in mind full near,
30 Making light show where I esteem most dear.
31 A malcontent yet seem I pleased still,
32 Bragging of heaven yet feeling pains of hell
33 But Time shall frame a time unto my will,
34 Whenas in sport this earnest will I tell;
35 Till then, sweet friend, abide these storms with me,
36 Which shall in joys of either fortunes be.

DE_VERE_No.13:
1 Whereas the heart at tennis plays, and men to gaming fall,
2 Love is the court, hope is the house, and favour serves the ball.
3 The ball itself is true desert; the line, which measure shows,
4 Is reason, whereon judgment looks how players win or lose.
5 The jetty is deceitful guile, the stopper, jealousy,
6 Which hath Sir Argus hundred eyes wherewith to watch and pry.
7 The fault, wherewith fifteen is lost, is want of wit and sense,
8 And he that brings the racket in is double diligence.
9 And lo, the racket is freewill, which makes the ball rebound;
10 And noble beauty is the chase, of every game the ground.
11 But rashness strikes the ball awry, and where is oversight?
12 A bandy ho, the people cry, and so the ball takes flight.
13 Now in the end, good-liking proves content the game and gain.
14 Thus in a tennis knit I love, a pleasure mixed with pain.

DE_VERE_No.14:
1 What cunning can express
2 The favour of her face,
3 To whom in this distress
4 I do appeal for grace?
5 A thousand Cupids fly
6 About her gentle eye.
7 From whence each throws a dart,
8 That kindleth soft sweet fire,
9 Within my sighing heart,
10 Possessed by desire;
11 No sweeter life I try,
12 Than in her love to die.
13 The Lily in the field,
14 That glories in his white,
15 For pureness now must yield
16 And render up his right;
17 Heaven pictured in her face
18 Doth promise joy and grace.
19 Fair Cynthias silver light,
20 That beats on running streams,
21 Compares not with her white,
22 Whose hairs are all sunbeams;
23 Her virtues so do shine,
24 As day unto mine eyne.
25 With this there is a Red
26 Exceeds the Damask Rose,
27 Which in her cheeks is spread,
28 Whence every favour grows;
29 In sky there is no star
30 That she surmounts not far.
31 When Phoebus from the bed
32 Of Thetis doth arise,
33 The morning, blushing red,
34 In fair carnation wise,
35 He shows it in her face
36 As Queen of every grace.
37 This pleasant Lily white,
38 This taint of roseate red,
39 This Cynthias silver light,
40 This sweet fair Dea spread,
41 These sunbeams in mine eye,
42 These beauties make me die.

DE_VERE_No.15:
1 Who taught thee first to sigh, alas, my heart?
2 Who taught thy tongue the woeful words of plaint?
3 Who filled thine eyes with tears of bitter smart?
4 Who gave thee grief and made thy joys so faint?
Love
5 Who first did print with colours pale thy face?
6 Who first did break thy sleeps of quiet rest?
7 Above the rest in Court, who gave thee Grace?
8 Who made thee strive in virtue to be best?
Love
9 In constant troth to bide so firm and sure,
10 To scorn the world, regarding but thy friend,
11 With patient mind each passion to endure,
12 In one desire to settle to thy end?
Love
13 Love then thy choice, wherein such faith doth bind,
14 As nought but death may ever change thy mind.

DE_VERE_No.16:
1 Were I a king I could command content;
2 Were I obscure unknown should be my cares,
3 And were I dead no thought should me torment,
4 Nor words, nor wrongs, nor loves, nor hopes, nor fears;
5 A doubtful choice of these things one to crave,
6 A kingdom or a cottage or a grave.

DE_VERE_No.17:
1 Sitting alone upon my thought, in melancholy mood,
2 In sight of sea, and at my back an ancient hoary wood,
3 I saw a fair young lady come, her secret fears to wail,
4 Clad all in colour of a nun, and covered with a veil.
5 Yet, for the day was clear and calm, I might discern her face,
6 As one might see a damask rose hid under crystal glass.
7 Three times with her soft hand full hard on her left side she knocks,
8 And sighed so sore as might have moved some pity in the rocks.
9 From sighs, and shedding amber tears, into sweet song she brake,
10 When thus the echo answered her to every word she spake.
11 O heavens! Who was the first that bred in me this fever?
Vere.
12 Who was the first that gave the wound, whose scar I wear for ever?
Vere.
13 What tyrant Cupid to my harms usurps the golden quiver?
Vere.
14 What wight first caught this heart, and can from bondage it deliver?
Vere.
15 Yet who doth most adore this wight, O hollow caves, tell true?
You.
16 What nymph deserves his liking best, yet doth in sorrow rue?
You.
17 What makes him not regard good will with some remorse or ruth?
Youth.
18 What makes him show, besides his birth, such pride and such untruth?
Youth.
19 May I his beauty match with love, if he my love will try?
Aye.
20 May I requite his birth with faith? Then faithful will I die?
Aye.
21 And I, that knew this lady well,
22 Said Lord, how great a miracle,
23 To her how echo told the truth,
24 As true as Phoebus oracle.

DE_VERE_No.18:
(see also four additional stanzas in No. 18b, p. 109)
1 My mind to me a kingdom is;
2 Such perfect joy therein I find
3 That it excels all other bliss
4 That world affords or grows by kind.
5 Though much I want which most men have,
6 Yet still my mind forbids to crave.
7 No princely pomp, no wealthy store,
8 No force to win the victory,
9 No wily wit to salve a sore,
10 No shape to feed each gazing eye,
11 To none of these I yield as thrall.
12 For why? My mind doth serve for all.
13 I see how plenty suffers oft,
14 How hasty climbers soon do fall;
15 I see that those that are aloft
16 Mishap doth threaten most of all;
17 They get with toil, they keep with fear.
18 Such cares my mind could never bear.
19 Content I live, this is my stay;
20 I seek no more than may suffice;
21 I press to bear no haughty sway;
22 Look what I lack my mind supplies.
23 Lo, thus I triumph like a king,
24 Content with that my mind doth bring.
25 Some have too much yet still do crave;
26 I little have and seek no more.
27 They are but poor though much they have
28 And I am rich with little store.
29 They poor, I rich; they beg, I give;
30 They lack, I leave; they pine, I live.
31 I laugh not at anothers loss,
32 I grudge not at anothers gain.
33 No worldly waves my mind can toss;
34 My state at one doth still remain.
35 I fear no foe nor fawning friend,
36 I loathe not life nor dread my end.
37 Some weigh their pleasure by their lust,
38 Their wisdom by their rage of will;
39 Their treasure is their only trust,
40 And cloaked craft their store of skill.
41 But all the pleasure that I find,
42 Is to maintain a quiet mind.
43 My wealth is health and perfect ease,
44 My conscience clear my chief defense;
45 I neither seek by bribes to please
46 Nor by deceit to breed offense.
47 Thus do I live, thus will I die.
48 Would all did so as well as I.

DE_VERE_No.18B:
1 I joy not in no earthly bliss,
2 I force not Croesus wealth a straw.
3 For care I know not what it is,
4 I fear not Fortunes fatal law.
5 My mind is such as may not move
6 For beauty bright nor force of love.
7 I wish but what I have at will,
8 I wander not to seek for more.
9 I like the plain, I climb no hill,
10 In greatest storms I sit on shore
11 And laugh at those that toil in vain,
12 To get what must be lost again.
13 I kiss not where I wish to kill,
14 I feign not love where most I hate.
15 I break no sleep to win my will,
16 I wait not at the mightys gate.
17 I scorn no poor, nor fear no rich,
18 I feel no want nor have too much.
19 The Court ne cart I like ne loathe,
20 Extremes are counted worst of all.
21 The golden mean betwixt them both
22 Doth surest sit and fear no fall.
23 This is my choice, for why I find
24 No wealth is like the quiet mind.

DE_VERE_No.19:
1 If women could be fair and yet not fond,
2 Or that their love were firm, not fickle still,
3 I would not marvel that they make men bond
4 By service long to purchase their good will.
5 But when I see how frail those creatures are,
6 I muse that men forget themselves so far.
7 To mark the choice they make and how they change,
8 How oft from Phoebus they do flee to Pan;
9 Unsettled still, like haggards wild they range,
10 These gentle birds that fly from man to man.
11 Who would not scorn and shake them from the fist,
12 And let them fly, fair fools, which way they list?
13 Yet for disport we fawn and flatter both,
14 To pass the time when nothing else can please,
15 And train them to our lure with subtle oath,
16 Till weary of their wiles ourselves we ease.
17 And then we say when we their fancy try,
18 To play with fools, oh what a fool was I.

DE_VERE_No.20:
1 In peascod time when hound to horn gives ear while buck is killed,
2 And little boys with pipes of corn sit keeping beasts in field,
3 I went to gather strawberries tho when woods and groves were fair,
4 And parched my face with Phoebus, lo, by walking in the air.
5 I lay me down all by a stream and banks all overhead,
6 And there I found the strangest dream, that ever young man had.
7 Methought I saw each Christmas game, both revels all and some,
8 And each thing else that man could name or might by fancy come,
9 The substance of the thing I saw, in silence pass it shall,
10 Because I lack the skill to draw, the order of them all.
11 But Venus shall not scape my pen, whose maidens in disdain
12 Sit feeding on the hearts of men, whom Cupids bow hath slain.
13 And that blind Boy sat all in blood, bebathed to the ears,
14 And like a conqueror he stood, and scorned lovers tears.
15 I have more hearts, quoth he, at call, than Caesar could command.
16 And like the deer I make them fall, that overcross the land.
17 I do increase their wandring wits, till that I dim their sight.
18  Tis I that do bereave them of their joy and chief delight.
19 Thus did I see this bragging Boy advance himself even then,
20 Deriding at the wanton toys, of foolish loving men,
21 Which when I saw for anger then my panting breast did beat,
22 To see how he sat taunting them, upon his royal seat.
23 O then I wished I had been free, and cured were my wound;
24 Methought I could display his arms, and coward deeds expound.
25 But I perforce must stay my muse, full sore against my heart,
26 For that I am a subject wight, and lanced with his dart.
27 But if that I achieve the fort, which I have took in charge,
28 My hand and head with quivering quill, shall blaze his name at large.

DE_VERE_No.21:
My Lord, I have understood by your Lordship's letters that Robert Christmas, according to my appointment, hath repaired to your good Lordship about my causes, and as your Lordship thinks good therein, as touching a new survey, so do I determine shall be done; for both as your Lordship perceives, and also myself, I have been greatly abused in the former by such as I put in trust tofore; but for that is past, now I have no other remedy but to look better to amend the fault in the rest of my dealings hereafter, and as for my timber at Colne Park, therein I had no other meaning save only to make, as it were, a yearly rent, so as I may without disparking the ground. But now for the surveyor which your Lordship hath named, I must get him by your Lordship's means and for your Lordship's sake, for I am utterly unacquainted with him.

And as for those large leases which your Lordship hath been advertised of to be granted by me, I do assure your Lordship, without dissembling my faults to you to whom I perceive myself so much to be bound unto for your singular care over my well-doing, I must confess my negligence and too little care, with the too too [sic?] much trust I have put to some over mine own doings; it may be I am greatly abused, but as yet, till I search into those things now, upon your Lordship's most gracious admonitions, I do not know, but it is likelier to be as your Lordship doth guess than otherwise and, if it be not so, it is more by good hap than of my providence.

The device of making free my copyholders, my Lord, I never thought of otherwise than a motion made to me by Robert Christmas wherein, among the other things, I bade him tell it your Lordship, at whose liking or disliking I was to be ruled in anything, knowing if it were a thing fit or unfit for me I should, by your Lordship's good advice, quickly understand, and so I left it to be not done, or taken in hand. And thus, sir, for these matters, both in this as in all other things, I am to be governed and commanded at your Lordship's good devotion.

I would to God your Lordship would let me understand some of your news (which here doth ring doubtfully in the ears of every man) of the murder of the Admiral of France and a number of noblemen and worthy gentlemen, and such as greatly have in their lifetimes honoured the Queen's Majesty our mistress, on whose tragedies we have a number of French Aeneases in this city that tells of their own overthrows with tears falling from their eyes, a piteous thing to hear, but a cruel and far more grievous thing we must deem it then to see. All rumours here are but confused of those troops that are escaped from Paris and Rouen, where Monsieur hath also been and, like a vesper Sicilianus, as they say, that cruelty spreads over all France, whereof your Lordship is better advertised than we are here. And sith the world is so full of treasons and vile instruments daily to attempt new and unlooked for things, good my Lord, I shall affectiously and heartily desire your Lordship to be careful both of yourself and of her Majesty, that your friends may long enjoy you, and you them. I speak because I am not ignorant what practices have been made against your person lately by Mather and later, as I understand, by foreign practices, if it be true. And think, if the Admiral in France was an eyesore or beam in the eyes of the papists, that the Lord Treasurer of England is a block and a cross-bar in their way, whose remove they will never stick to attempt, seeing they have prevailed so well in others'.

This estate hath depended on you a great while, as all the world doth judge; and now all men's eyes, not being occupied any more on these lost lords are, as it were, on a sudden bent and fixed on you, as a singular hope and pillar whereto the religion hath to lean. And blame me not, though I am bolder with your Lordship at this present than my custom is, for I am one that count myself a follower of yours now in all fortunes, and what shall hap to you, I count it hap to myself or, at the least, I will make myself a voluntary partaker of it.

Thus, my Lord, I humbly desire your Lordship to pardon my youth, but to take in good part my zeal and affection towards your Lordship, as on whom I have builded my foundation either to stand or fall. And good my Lord, think I do not this presumptuously, as to advise you that am but to take advice of your Lordship, but to admonish you as one with whom I would spend my blood and life, so much you have made me yours. And I do protest, there is nothing more desired of me than so to be taken and accounted of you. Thus, with my hearty commendations and your daughter's, we leave you to the custody of Almighty God. Your Lordship's affectioned son-in-law.

Edward Oxenford

DE_VERE_No.22:
My very good Lord, I hope it is not out of your remembrance how long sithence I have been a suitor to her Majesty that she would give me leave to try my title to the forest at the law, but I found that so displeasing unto her that, in place of receiving that ordinary favour which is of course granted to the meanest subject, I was browbeaten and had many bitter speeches given me; nevertheless, at length, by means of some of the Lords of the Council, among which your Lordship especially, her Majesty was persuaded to give me ear. At that time, which was at Somerset House (if your Lordship please to call to mind), her Majesty would needs have it committed unto arbitrers, pretending therein to do me especial favour in cutting off the long circumstances of the law and charges pertaining thereto. But after I had consented thereunto, for me could be no other arbiter permitted than the Lord Chancellor, whom she had chosen for herself; this I am assured your Lordship hath good cause to remember by her Majesty's exception against you, in that she thought you partial to your son-in-law. But these things I call only to mind for your Lordship's better remembrance which, through so many affairs, otherwise, in so long a time, it is no marvel if perhaps you have easily forgotten. Therefore I will to purpose only further call to remembrance the success of this arbitrament, which was thus. After much ado, and a good year spent by delays from her Majesty, my Lord Chancellor, then Sir Christopher Hatton, being earnestly called upon, appointed a time of hearing, both for her Majesty's learned counsel at the law and mine, whereupon what he conceived thereby of my title, he was ready to have made his report unto her Majesty. But such was my misfortune (I do not think her mind to do me any wrong), that she flatly refused therein to hear my Lord Chancellor, and for a final answer commanded me no more to follow the suit for, whether it was hers or mine, she was resolved to dispose thereof at her pleasure. A strange sentence, methought, which, being justly considered, I may say she had done me more favour if she had suffered me to try my title at law, than this arbitrament under pretence of expedition and grace; the extremity had been far more safe than the remedy which I was persuaded to accept. But after I had made some complaint of this hard determination, yet in so desperate a state, she promised this relief to my cause that, in some other matter, that should be as commodious as that unto me, she would recompense me in the meanwhile. Hence riseth the cause, my Lord, wherefore I have preferred many suits to her Majesty, but have found in them all the same delays and difficulties that I did in the other before. But now the ground whereon I lay my suit being so just and reasonable that either I should expect some satisfaction by way of recompense, or restoration of mine own (as I am yet persuaded till law hath convinced me), these are most earnestly to desire a continuance of your Lordship's favour and furtherance in my suit which I made at Greenwich to her Majesty, at her last being there, about three commodities, to wit, the oils, wools and fruits, in giving therefor as then my proffer was. I do the rather now renew the same for that I do not hear as yet they are disposed otherwise, and that the time is fittest, as well as for her Majesty's commodity as his that shall take it, and considering (if her Majesty will have a just consideration of the premises) I am to challenge and expect somewhat. Your Lordship knows the whole process of the matter, and can better judge than any other (as to whom my estate is best known, & how hardly I may forbear so great an interest without any recompense) and, therefore, as to the meetest (for that my state and cause, both in right and conscience, is best understood) to conceive of the just desire I make of this suit, I do address myself to your Lordship, most earnestly to crave both your opinion and counsel, your favour and furtherance, whether I were best to follow this suit which I have commenced or, it standing so that there is no good or hope to be done or conceived therein, to seek again her Majesty's favour that I might proceed in law to try my title to the forest. And thus desiring your Lordship to hold me excused for that I am so long in a matter that concerneth me so much, I will make an end, this 25 of October, 1593.

And always rest your Lordship's to command.

Edward Oxenford

DE_VERE_No.23:
Seeing that it hath pleased your Majesty of your most gracious inclination to justice & right to restore me to be keeper of your game as well in your forest of Waltham, as also in Havering Park, I can do no less in duty and love to your Majesty but employ myself in the execution thereof. And to the end you might the better know in what sort both the forest & the park have been abused, and yet continued, as well in destroying of the deer as in spoiling of your demesne wood by such as have patents & had licences heretofore for felling of timber in the Queen's time lately deceased, presuming thereby that they may do what they list, I was bold to send unto your Majesty a man skilful, learned & experienced in forest causes, who being a dweller and eye-witness thereof might inform you of the truth. And because your Majesty upon a bare information could not be so well satisfied of every particular as by lawful testimony & examination of credible witness upon oath, according to your Majesty's appointment by commission a course hath been taken in which your Majesty shall be fully satisficed of truth. This commission, together with the depositions of the witness, I do send to your Majesty by this bearer, who briefly can inform you of the whole contence. So that now, having lawfully proved unto your Majesty that Sir John Gray hath killed and destroyed your deer in Havering Park without any warrant for the same, his patent is void in law, & therefore I most humbly beseech your Majesty to make him an example for all others that shall in like sort abuse their places, & to restore me to the possession thereof, in both which your Majesty shall do but justice and right to the one & other. This 30 of January 1603. Your Majesty's most humble subject and servant, E. Oxenforde.

DE_VERE_No.24:
My very honorable Sir
Sir, I have received your letters, full of humanity and courtesy, and strongly resembling
your great love and singular affection towards me, like true children duly procreated of
such a mother, for whom I find myself from day to day more bound to your honor. Your
good admonishments for the observance of good order according to your appointed rules,
I am resolved (God aiding) to keep with all diligence, as a thing that I may know and
consider to tend especially to my own good and profit, using therein the advice and 
authority of those who are near me, whose discretion I esteem so great (if it is convenient
to me to say something to their advantage) that not only will they comport themselves
according as a given time requires it, but will as well do what is more, as long as I govern
myself as you have ordered and commanded. As to the order of my study, because it
requires a long discourse to explain it in detail, and the time is short at this hour, I pray
you affectionately to excuse me therefrom for the present, assuring you that by the first
passer-by I shall make it known to you at full length. In the meantime, I pray to God to
give you health. Edward Oxinford.

DE_VERE_No.25:
My Lord, having th' opportunity to write by this bearer who departeth from us here in
Padua this night, although I cannot make so large a write as I would gladly desire, yet I
thought it not fit to let so short a time slip, wherefore remembering my commendations to
your good Lordship, these shall be to desire you to pardon the shortness of my letters, and
to impute it at this present to the haste of this messenger's departure.
And as concerning mine own matters, I shall desire your Lordship to make no stay of the
sales of my land, but that all things (according to my determination before I came away,
with those that I appointed last by my servant, William Booth) might go forward
according to mine order taken, without any other alteration.
Thus recommending myself unto your Lordship again, and to my Lady your wife, with
mine, I leave further to trouble your Lordship. From Padua, the 27th of November.
Your Lordship's to command,
Edward Oxenford

DE_VERE_No.26:
My good Lord, having looked for your Lordship's letters a great while, at length when I grew to despair of them I received two from your Lordship.  Three packets which at sundry times I had sent this summer towards England returned back again by reason the plague being in the passages, none were suffered to pass, but as they came were returned back, which I came not to the knowledge of till my return now to Venice, where I have been grieved with a fever.  Yet with the help of God now I have recovered the same and am past the danger thereof, though brought very weak thereby and hindered from a great deal of travel, which grieves me most, fearing my time not sufficient for my desire, for although I have seen so much as sufficeth me, yet would I have time to profit thereby. 
 
Your Lordship seems desirous to know how I like Italy, what is mine intention in travel, and when I mean to return.  For my liking of Italy, my Lord, I am glad I have seen it, and I care not ever to see it any more unless it be to serve my prince or country.  For mine intention to travel, I am desirous to see more of Germany, wherefore I shall desire your Lordship, with my Lord of Leicester, to procure me the next summer to continue my licence, at the end of which I mean undoubtedly to return.  I thought to have seen Spain, but by Italy I guess the worse. 

I have sent one of my servants into England with some new disposition of my things there, wherefore I will not trouble your Lordship in these letters with the same. 
 
If this sickness had not happened unto me, which hath taken away this chiefest time of travel at this present I would not have written for further leave, but to supply the which I doubt not her Majesty will not deny me so small a favour. 
 
By reason of my great charges of travel and sickness I have taken up of Mr Baptisto Nigrone 500 crowns, which I shall desire your Lordship to see there repaid, hoping by this time my money which is made of the sale of my land is all come in. 
 
Likewise I shall desire your Lordship that whereas I had one Luke Atslowe that served, who now is become a lewd subject to her Majesty and an evil member to his country, which had certain leases of me, I do think according to law he leeseth them all to the Queen sith he is become one of the Romish church, and there hath performed all such ceremonies as might reconcile himself to that church, having used lewd speeches against the Queen's Majesty's supremacy, legitimation, government and particular life, and is here, as it were, a practiser upon our nation.  Then this is my desire, that your Lordship, if it be so as I do take it, would procure those leases into my hands again, whereas I have understood by my Lord of Bedford they have hardly dealt with my tenants. 
 
Thus thanking your Lordship for your good news of my wife's delivery, I recommend myself unto your favour, and although I write for a few months more, yet though I have them, so it may fall out I will shorten them myself. 

DE_VERE_No.27:
My Lord, although I have forborne in some respect which I hold private to myself either to write or come unto your Lordship, yet had I determined, as opportunity should have served me, to have accomplished the same in compass of a few days.  But now, urged thereunto by your letters to satisfy you the sooner, I must let your Lordship understand thus much.  That is, until I can better satisfy or advertise myself of some mislikes, I am not determined, as touching my wife, to accompany her.  What they are, because some are not to be spoken of or written upon as imperfections, I will not deal withal.  Some that otherways discontent me, I will not blaze or publish until it please me.  And last of all, I mean not to weary my life any more with such troubles and molestations as I have endured, nor will I, to please your Lordship only, discontent myself.  Wherefore as your Lordship very well writeth unto me that you mean, if it standeth with my liking, to receive her into your house, these are likewise to let your Lordship understand that it doth very well content me; for there, as your daughter or her mother's, more than my wife, you may take comfort of her, and I, rid of the cumber thereby, shall remain well eased of many griefs.  I do not doubt but she hath sufficient proportion for her being to live upon and to maintain herself. 
 
This might have been done through private conference before, and had not needed to have been the fable of the world if you would have had the patience to have understood me, but I do not know by what or whose advice it was to run that course so contrary to my will or meaning which made her disgraced to the world, raised suspicions openly that with private conference might have been more silently handled, and hath given me more greater cause to mislike.  Wherefore I desire your Lordship in these causes (now you shall understand me) not to urge me any farther.  And so I write unto your Lordship, as you have done unto me, this Friday, the 27th of April. 

DE_VERE_No.28:
My very good Lord, yesterday at your Lordship's earnest request I had some conference with you about your daughter, wherein for that her Majesty had so often moved me, and for that you dealt so earnestly with me, to content as much as I could I did agree that you might bring her to the court with condition that she should not come when I was present nor at any time to have speech with me, and further that your Lordship should not urge farther in her cause.  But now I understand that your Lordship means this day to bring her to the court, and that you mean afterward to prosecute the cause with further hope.  Now if your Lordship shall do so, then shall you take more in hand than I have or can promise you.  For always I have and will still prefer mine own content before others', and observing that wherein I may temper or moderate for your sake, I will do most willingly.  Wherefore I shall desire your Lordship not to take advantage of my promise till you have given me some honourable assurance by letter or word of your performance of the condition, which being observed I could yield, as it is my duty, to her Majesty's request, and bear with your fatherly desire towards her.  Otherwise all that is done can stand to none effect. 
 
From my lodging at Charing Cross, this morning. 

DE_VERE_No.29:
My Lord, Robin Christmas did yesterday tell me how honourably you had dealt with her Majesty as touching my liberty, and that as this day she had made promise to your Lordship that it should be, unless your Lordship shall make some to put her Majesty in mind thereof, I fear in these other causes of the two Lords she will forget me, for she is nothing of her own disposition, as I find, so ready to deliver as speedy to commit, and every little trifle gives her matter for a long delay. 

I willed E. Hammond to report unto your Lordship her Majesty's message unto me by Mr Secretary Walsingham, which was to this effect: first, that she would have heard the matter again touching Henry Howard, Southwell and Arundel; then, that she understood I meant to cut down all my woods, especially about my house, which she did not so well like of as if I should sell some land else otherwhere; and last, that she heard that I had been hardly used by some of my servants during this time of my commit, wherein she promised her aid, so far as she could with justice, to redress the loss I had sustained thereby, to which I made answer as I willed Hammond to relate unto your Lordship. 
 
Further, my Lord, whereof I am desirous something to write, I have understood of certain of my men hath resorted unto your Lordship and sought, by false reports of other of their fellows, both to abuse your Lordship and me.  But for that this bearer seems most herein to be touched, I have sent him unto your Lordship, as is his earnest desire, that your Lordship might so know him as your evil opinion, being conceived amiss by these lewd fellows, may be removed.  And truly, my Lord, I hear of those things wherewith he is charged and, I can assure you, wrongfully and slanderously, but the world is so cunning as of a shadow they can make a substance, and of a likelihood a troth.  And these fellows, if they be those which I suppose, I do not doubt but so to decipher them to the world as easily your Lordship shall look into their lewdness and unfaithfulness, which, till my liberty, I mean to defer, as more mindful of that importing me most at this time than yet seeking to revenge myself of such perverse and impudent dealing of servants, which I know have not wanted encouragement and setting on. 
 
But letting these things pass for a while, I must not forget to give your Lordship those thanks which are due to you for this your honourable dealing to her Majesty in my behalf, which I hope shall not be without effect, the which attending from the court, I will take my leave of your Lordship, and rest at your commandment at my house this morning.   

DE_VERE_No.30:
I have been an earnest suitor unto your Lordship for my Lord Lumley, that it would please you for my sake to stand his good Lord and friend which, as I perceive, your Lordship hath already very honourably [performed, for?] the which, [as I?] am in a number of things more than I can reckon bound unto your Lordship, so am I in this likewise, especially for he hath matched with a near kinswoman of mine to whose father I always was beholding unto for his assured and kind disposition unto me.  Further, among all the rest of my blood, this only remains in account either of me or else of them, as your Lordship doth know very well, the rest having embraced further alliances to leave their nearer consanguinity.  And as I hope your Lordship doth account me now one whom you have so much bound as I am to be yours before any else in the world, both through match, whereby [I?] count my greatest stay, and by your Lordship's friendly usage and sticking by me in this time wherein I am hedged in with so many enemies, so likewise I hope your Lordship will take all them for your followers and most at command which are inclined and affected to me.  Wherefore I shall once again be thus bold with your Lordship to be [the more?] importunate in this matter [for?] your Lordship's favour in [easing?] my Lord Lumley's payment to her Majesty, wherein we [shall?] all give your Lordship thanks, and you shall do me as great an honour herein as a profit if it had been to myself, in that through your Lordship's favour I shall be able to pleasure my friend and stand needless of others that have forsaken me.  Thus, for that your Lordship is troubled with many matters where you are, I crave pardon for troubling you.

DE_VERE_No.31:
It is not unknown to your Lordship that I have entered into a great number of bonds to such as have purchased lands of me, to discharge them of all encumbrances, and because I stand indebted unto her Majesty (as your Lordship knoweth), many of the said purchasers do greatly fear some trouble likely to fall upon them by reason of her Majesty's said debt, & especially if the lands of the Lord Darcy and Sir William Waldegrave should be extended for the same, who have two several statutes of great sums for their discharge.  Whereupon many of the said purchasers have been suitors unto me to procure the discharging of her Majesty's said debt, and do seem very willing to bear the burden thereof if by my means the same might be stalled payable at some convenient days. 
 
I have therefore thought good to acquaint your Lordship with this their suit, requiring most earnestly your Lordship's furtherance in this behalf, whereby I shall be unburdened of a great care which I have for the saving of my honour, and shall by this means also unburden my wife's jointure of that charge which might happen hereafter to be imposed upon the same if God should call your Lordship and me away before her. 

My Lord, this other day your man Stainner(?) told me that you sent for Amice, my man, and if he were absent, that Lyly should come unto you.  I sent Amice, for he was in the way.  And I think very strange that your Lordship should enter into that course towards me whereby I must learn that I knew not before, both of your opinion and goodwill towards me.  But I pray, my Lord, leave that course, for I mean not to be your ward nor your child.  I serve her Majesty, and I am that I am, and by alliance near to your Lordship, but free, and scorn to be offered that injury to think I am so weak of government as to be ruled by servants, or not able to govern myself.  If your Lordship take and follow this course, you deceive yourself and make me take another course than yet I have not thought of.  Wherefore these shall be to desire your Lordship, if that I may make account of your friendship, that you will leave that course, as hurtful to us both.
 
DE_VERE_No.32:
My very good Lord.  As I have been beholding unto you divers times, & of late by my brother Robert Cecil, whereby I have been the better able to follow my suit wherein I have some comfort at this time from Mr Secretary Walsingham, so am I now bold to crave your Lordship's help at this present, for being now almost at a point to taste that good which her Majesty shall determine, yet am I one that hath long besieged a fort, and not able to compass the end or reap the fruit of his travail, being forced to levy his siege for want of munition.  Being therefore thus disfurnished and unprovided to follow her Majesty as I perceive she will look for, I most earnestly desire your Lordship that you will lend me 200 pounds till her Majesty performeth her promise, out of which I shall make my payment, if it please you, with the rest that your Lordship hath at sundry times to my great furtherance and help in my causes sent me by your servant and steward Billet. 
 
I would be loath to have troubled your Lordship with so much if I were not kept here back with this tedious suit from London, where I would have found means to have taken up so much to have served my turn till her Majesty had dispatched me, but for that I dare not (having been here so long, and the matter growing to some conclusion) be absent. 
 
I pray your Lordship bear with me, that at this time wherein I am to set myself in order I do become so troublesome.  From the court this morning. 

DE_VERE_No.33:
My very good Lord, where I mortgaged my lease of Aveley to Mr Herdson, and not as yet redeemed, and now, as well for the supply of my present wants as also to have some three hundred pounds of ready money to redeem certain leases at Hedingham which were gotten from me very unreasonably for divers years yet enduring, and are of as good clear yearly value as my said lease of Aveley is, I therefore most earnestly desire your Lordship to signify your liking to me in writing to dispose of the said lease at my pleasure; otherwise, there is not any will deal with me for the same nor for any part thereof, wherein I shall be greatly beholding to your Lordship, as I am in all the rest of my whole estate.  The 5th of August. 

DE_VERE_No.34:
I would have been with your Lordship before this but that I have not had my health.  Nevertheless, Hampton being returned from the country, I have sent him to your Lordship that he may advertise you of his proceedings there. 
 
At Oatlands I think your Lordship remembers a complaint of [  ] Bellingham's son of his mother's putting forth of the castle, which was before anything done, whereupon your Lordship directed a letter unto the sheriff, [  ] whereof, as it seems, Thomas Hampton had dealt with more favour towards her than the letters unto the sheriff imported.  Notwithstanding, I understand Bellingham is gone to the court, encouraged I know not by what friends, to complain, as he did report here in town, not to your Lordship, but to her Majesty's self.  My Lord, it was ever meant that he should have consideration as reason and conscience might afford him.  But sithence he taketh a violent course and refuseth reasonable offers I have sent Hampton to inform your Lordship the state of the man, who hath received heretofore a pardon for three burglaries and stands bound to the good behaviour, which behaviour, for sundry and manifest breaches thereof which I can prove, he hath lost the benefit of his pardon, whereby as lord of the manor by escheat I am to deal with him as he hath given me occasion, and herein I hope her Majesty will have consideration sith the same case hath been seen once in Henry the Seventh's time and one example in this, her Majesty's.  For those things which falls to me by escheat I do not doubt that her Majesty will, against her law, give any ear, or hearken to such wrongful complaint. 
 
Skinner hath been often with me for a composition, upon what points(?) of law Hampton is to inform your Lordship, referring myself wholly to your Lordship who in all my causes I find mine honourable good Lord, and to deal more fatherly than friendly with me, for the which I do acknowledge, and ever will, myself in most especial wise bound. 
 
And whereas there is a lease in Arthur Milles hand of the manor and lands of Lavenham, I desire your Lordship to cause him to make over his trust unto my servant Mynne, to whom the other lease is made. 
 
If there be complaints made unto your Lordship (as I doubt not but that there will) against the proceedings of mine officers, I most earnestly desire that there may be some reasonable time appointed for the answering of them because my counsel is not in town, but shall be before or at the beginning of the term to satisfice your Lordship and answer their particular complaints.  London, this 8th of September. 
 

DE_VERE_No.35:
My Lord, I do thank your Lordship for the punishment of Hampton, whose evil dealings towards me, being put in trust with my causes in law, I hope your Lordship will think them sufficient to deserve your disgrace, especially knowing his corruptions, which for the more assured knowledge of your Lordship I have sent unto the parties themselves from whom he hath drawn money to his own behoof, whose confirmations, so soon as they can be brought out of the country, they shall be delivered to your Lordship. 
 
In the mean season I shall most heartily pray your Lordship to persevere in your good favour towards me whereby I may procure redress against this which Amyce hath passed under the great seal by the practice of Hampton's fraudulent devise, as shall appear (if I may have leisure to manifest the same) every day more and more.  The changing of the name of my servant without my privity, and putting in another in trust for himself (as bad, as I understand, as himself), if your Lordship will, may give your Lordship certain knowledge of the deceit.  The cozening of so many tenants of their money and the forfeiting of my lease of Skinner's land do witness enough his corruption.  I know if your Lordship will stand mine honourable good Lord and friend herein by handling this Hampton roughly, and this Amyce so that he be but put in fear, that you may bring them to that order which is reason, that I may enjoy mine own lands, as from the beginning was meant by her Majesty.  And as for this letter of Amyce's which I have returned to your Lordship, both concerning my messages to him and the dealing of my servant, as he reports is most false, wherefore I will refer all to your Lordship, who knows the intent of her Majesty's first meaning to me was far otherwise in the beginning when with this suit of mine she thought to recompense me in some sort for forbearing my suit for the Forest, and can judge how unfaithfully I am dealt withal by these parties. 
 
Which favour if your Lordship shall do for me, then would I gladly break unto your Lordship another matter which I would have done ere this had I not been intercepted by these unlooked for troubles.  And this it is. 
 
Whereas I have heard her Majesty meant to sell unto one Middleton, a merchant, and one Carmarden the demesnes of Denbigh which as I am informed is 230 by yearly rent now as it is, I would be an humble suitor to her Majesty that I might have had this bargain, paying the 8000 as they should have done, accepting for 5000 thereof the pension which she hath given me in the Exchequer, and the other 3000 the next term, or upon such reasonable days as her Majesty would grant me by her favour.

BACON_No.1:
What is truth? said jesting Pilate;[42] and would not stay for an
answer. Certainly, there be that delight in giddiness; and count it
a bondage to fix a belief; affecting freewill in thinking as well as
in acting. And though the sects of philosophers of that kind be gone,
yet there remain certain discoursing wits which are of the same veins,
though there be not so much blood in them as was in those of the
ancients. But it is not only the difficulty and labor which men take in
finding out of truth: nor again, that, when it is found, it imposeth
upon mens thoughts, that doth bring lies in favor; but a natural
though corrupt love of the lie itself. One of the later schools[43] of
the Grecians examineth the matter, and is at a stand to think what
should be in it that men should love lies; where neither they make
for pleasure, as with poets; nor for advantage, as with the merchant,
but for the lies sake. But I cannot tell; this same truth is a naked
and open daylight, that doth not show the masks, and mummeries, and
triumphs of the world, half so stately and daintily as candle-lights.
Truth may perhaps come to the price of a pearl, that showeth best by
day, but it will not rise to the price of a diamond or carbuncle,
that showeth best in varied lights. A mixture of a lie doth ever add
pleasure. Doth any man doubt, that if there were taken out of mens
minds vain opinions, flattering hopes, false valuations, imaginations
as one would, and the like, but it would leave the minds of a number
of men poor shrunken things, full of melancholy and indisposition, and
unpleasing to themselves? One of the fathers,[44] in great severity,
called poesy vinum dmonum,[45] because it filleth the imagination,
and yet it is but with the shadow of a lie. But it is not the lie that
passeth through the mind, but the lie that sinketh in, and settleth
in it, that doth the hurt, such as we spake of before. But howsoever
these things are thus in mens depraved judgments and affections, yet
truth, which only doth judge itself, teacheth that the inquiry of
truth, which is the love-making, or wooing of it, the knowledge of
truth, which is the presence of it, and the belief of truth, which
is the enjoying of it, is the sovereign good of human nature. The
first creature of God, in the works of the days, was the light of the
sense;[46] the last was the light of reason;[47] and his sabbath work,
ever since, is the illumination of his Spirit. First, he breathed light
upon the face of the matter, or chaos; then he breathed light into
the face of man; and still he breatheth and inspireth light into the
face of his chosen. The poet[48] that beautified the sect,[49] that
was otherwise inferior to the rest, saith yet excellently well: It
is a pleasure to stand upon the shore, and to see ships tossed upon
the sea; a pleasure to stand in the window of a castle, and to see a
battle, and the adventures thereof below; but no pleasure is comparable
to the standing upon the vantage-ground of truth (a hill not to be
commanded, and where the air is always clear and serene), and to
see the errors, and wanderings, and mists, and tempests, in the vale
below;[50] so always that this prospect be with pity, and not with
swelling or pride. Certainly it is heaven upon earth, to have a mans
mind move in charity, rest in providence, and turn upon the poles of
truth.

To pass from theological and philosophical truth to the truth of civil
business; it will be acknowledged, even by those that practise it not,
that clear and round dealing is the honor of mans nature, and that
mixture of falsehood is like alloy in coin of gold and silver, which
may make the metal work the better, but it embaseth it. For these
winding and crooked courses are the goings of the serpent; which goeth
basely upon the belly, and not upon the feet. There is no vice that
doth so cover a man with shame, as to be found false and perfidious;
and therefore Montaigne[51] saith prettily, when he inquired the
reason why the word of the lie should be such a disgrace, and such an
odious charge: saith he, If it be well weighed, to say that a man
lieth, is as much as to say that he is brave towards God and a coward
towards men. For a lie faces God, and shrinks from man; surely, the
wickedness of falsehood and breach of faith cannot possibly be so
highly expressed, as in that it shall be the last peal to call the
judgments of God upon the generations of men: it being foretold, that,
when Christ cometh, he shall not find faith upon the earth.[52]

BACON_No.2:
Men fear death as children fear to go in the dark; and as that natural
fear in children is increased with tales, so is the other. Certainly,
the contemplation of death, as the wages of sin, and passage to another
world, is holy and religious; but the fear of it, as a tribute due
unto nature, is weak. Yet in religious meditations there is sometimes
mixture of vanity and of superstition. You shall read in some of the
friars books of mortification, that a man should think with himself,
what the pain is, if he have but his fingers end pressed or tortured;
and thereby imagine what the pains of death are, when the whole body
is corrupted and dissolved; when many times death passeth with less
pain than the torture of a limb, for the most vital parts are not
the quickest of sense. And by him that spake only as a philosopher
and natural man, it was well said, Pompa mortis magis terret, quam
mors ipsa.[54] Groans and convulsions, and a discolored face, and
friends weeping, and blacks[55] and obsequies, and the like, show death
terrible. It is worthy the observing, that there is no passion in
the mind of man so weak, but it mates and masters the fear of death;
and therefore death is no such terrible enemy when a man hath so many
attendants about him that can win the combat of him. Revenge triumphs
over death; love slights it; honor aspireth to it; grief flieth to it;
fear preoccupateth it; nay, we read, after Otho the emperor had slain
himself, pity (which is the tenderest of affections) provoked many
to die out of mere compassion to their sovereign, and as the truest
sort of followers.[56] Nay, Seneca[57] adds niceness and satiety:
Cogita quamdiu eadem feceris; mori velle, non tantum fortis, aut
miser, sed etiam fastidiosus potest.[58] A man would die, though he
were neither valiant nor miserable, only upon a weariness to do the
same thing so oft over and over. It is no less worthy to observe, how
little alteration in good spirits the approaches of death make: for
they appear to be the same men till the last instant. Augustus Csar
died in a compliment: Livia, conjugii nostri memor, vive et vale.[59]
Tiberius in dissimulation, as Tacitus saith of him, Jam Tiberium
vires et corpus, non dissimulatio, deserebant:[60] Vespasian in a
jest, sitting upon the stool,[61] Ut puto Deus fio;[62] Galba with
a sentence, Feri, si ex re sit populi Romani,[63] holding forth
his neck; Septimus Severus in dispatch, Adeste, si quid mihi restat
agendum,[64] and the like. Certainly, the Stoics[65] bestowed too much
cost upon death, and by their great preparations made it appear more
fearful. Better, saith he, qui finem vit extremum inter munera ponit
natur.[66] It is as natural to die as to be born; and to a little
infant, perhaps, the one is as painful as the other. He that dies in
an earnest pursuit, is like one that is wounded in hot blood, who,
for the time, scarce feels the hurt; and therefore a mind fixed and
bent upon somewhat that is good, doth avert the dolors of death; but,
above all, believe it, the sweetest canticle is Nunc dimittis,[67]
when a man hath obtained worthy ends and expectations. Death hath this
also, that it openeth the gate to good fame, and extinguisheth envy:
Extinctus amabitur idem.[68]


BACON_No.3:
Revenge is a kind of wild justice, which the more mans nature runs
to, the more ought law to weed it out; for as for the first wrong, it
doth but offend the law, but the revenge of that wrong, putteth the
law out of office. Certainly, in taking revenge, a man is but even
with his enemy, but in passing it over, he is superior; for it is a
princes part to pardon; and Solomon, I am sure, saith, It is the
glory of a man to pass by an offence. That which is past is gone and
irrevocable, and wise men have enough to do with things present and
to come; therefore they do but trifle with themselves that labor in
past matters. There is no man doth a wrong for the wrongs sake, but
thereby to purchase himself profit, or pleasure, or honor, or the like;
therefore, why should I be angry with a man for loving himself better
than me? And if any man should do wrong merely out of ill-nature, why,
yet it is but like the thorn or briar, which prick and scratch, because
they can do no other. The most tolerable sort of revenge is for those
wrongs which there is no law to remedy; but then, let a man take heed
the revenge be such as there is no law to punish, else a mans enemy is
still beforehand, and it is two for one. Some, when they take revenge,
are desirous the party should know whence it cometh. This is the more
generous; for the delight seemeth to be not so much in doing the hurt
as in making the party repent; but base and crafty cowards are like
the arrow that flieth in the dark. Cosmus, Duke of Florence,[87] had
a desperate saying against perfidious or neglecting friends, as if
those wrongs were unpardonable. You shall read, saith he, that we
are commanded to forgive our enemies; but you never read that we are
commanded to forgive our friends. But yet the spirit of Job was in a
better tune: Shall we, saith he, take good at Gods hands, and not
be content to take evil also?[88] and so of friends in a proportion.
This is certain, that a man that studieth revenge keeps his own wounds
green, which otherwise would heal and do well. Public revenges[89]
are for the most part fortunate; as that for the death of Csar;[90]
for the death of Pertinax; for the death of Henry the Third of
France;[91] and many more. But in private revenges it is not so; nay,
rather, vindictive persons live the life of witches, who, as they are
mischievous, so end they unfortunate.

BACON_No.4:
It was a high speech of Seneca (after the manner of the Stoics), that
the good things which belong to prosperity are to be wished, but
the good things that belong to adversity are to be admired. (Bona
rerum secundarum optabilia, adversarum mirabilia.)[92] Certainly, if
miracles be the command over nature, they appear most in adversity.
It is yet a higher speech of his than the other (much too high for a
heathen), It is true greatness to have in one the frailty of a man,
and the security of a God. (Vere magnum habere fragilitatem hominis
securitatem Dei.)[93] This would have done better in poesy, where
transcendencies are more allowed, and the poets, indeed, have been
busy with it; for it is, in effect, the thing which is figured in
that strange fiction of the ancient poets,[94] which seemeth not to
be without mystery; nay, and to have some approach to the state of a
Christian, that Hercules, when he went to unbind Prometheus (by whom
human nature is represented), sailed the length of the great ocean in
an earthen pot or pitcher, lively describing Christian resolution,
that saileth in the frail bark of the flesh through the waves of the
world. But to speak in a mean, the virtue of prosperity is temperance,
the virtue of adversity is fortitude, which in morals is the more
heroical virtue. Prosperity is the blessing of the Old Testament,
adversity is the blessing of the New, which carrieth the greater
benediction, and the clearer revelation of Gods favor. Yet even in the
Old Testament, if you listen to Davids harp, you shall hear as many
hearse-like airs[95] as carols; and the pencil of the Holy Ghost hath
labored more in describing the afflictions of Job than the felicities
of Solomon. Prosperity is not without many fears and distastes; and
adversity is not without comforts and hopes. We see, in needleworks and
embroideries, it is more pleasing to have a lively work upon a sad and
solemn ground, than to have a dark and melancholy work upon a lightsome
ground: judge, therefore, of the pleasure of the heart by the pleasure
of the eye. Certainly, virtue is like precious odors, most fragrant
when they are incensed, or crushed; for prosperity doth best discover
vice, but adversity doth best discover virtue.[96]




BACON_No.5:
Dissimulation is but a faint kind of policy, or wisdom; for it asketh
a strong wit and a strong heart to know when to tell truth, and to do
it; therefore it is the weaker sort of politicians that are the great
dissemblers.

Tacitus saith, Livia sorted well with the arts of her husband, and
dissimulation of her son;[97] attributing arts or policy to Augustus,
and dissimulation to Tiberius: and again, when Mucianus encourageth
Vespasian to take arms against Vitellius, he saith, We rise not
against the piercing judgment of Augustus, nor the extreme caution or
closeness of Tiberius.[98] These properties of arts or policy, and
dissimulation or closeness, are indeed habits and faculties several,
and to be distinguished; for if a man have that penetration of judgment
as he can discern what things are to be laid open, and what to be
secreted, and what to be showed at half-lights, and to whom and when
(which indeed are arts of state, and arts of life, as Tacitus well
calleth them), to him a habit of dissimulation is a hinderance and a
poorness. But if a man cannot obtain to that judgment, then it is left
to him generally to be close, and a dissembler; for where a man cannot
choose or vary in particulars, there it is good to take the safest and
wariest way in general, like the going softly by one that cannot well
see. Certainly, the ablest men that ever were, have had all an openness
and frankness of dealing, and a name of certainty and veracity: but
then they were like horses well managed, for they could tell passing
well when to stop or turn; and at such times, when they thought the
case indeed required dissimulation, if then they used it, it came to
pass that the former opinion spread abroad, of their good faith and
clearness of dealing, made them almost invisible.

There be three degrees of this hiding and veiling of a mans self: the
first, closeness, reservation, and secrecy; when a man leaveth himself
without observation, or without hold to be taken, what he is: the
second, dissimulation in the negative; when a man lets fall signs and
arguments, that he is not that he is: and the third, simulation in the
affirmative; when a man industriously and expressly feigns and pretends
to be that he is not.

For the first of these, secrecy, it is indeed the virtue of a
confessor; and assuredly the secret man heareth many confessions; for
who will open himself to a blab or a babbler? But if a man be thought
secret, it inviteth discovery, as the more close air sucketh in the
more open; and, as in confession, the revealing is not for worldly use,
but for the ease of a mans heart, so secret men come to the knowledge
of many things in that kind; while men rather discharge their minds
than impart their minds. In few words, mysteries are due to secrecy.
Besides (to say truth), nakedness is uncomely, as well in mind as
body; and it addeth no small reverence to mens manners and actions,
if they be not altogether open. As for talkers and futile persons,
they are commonly vain and credulous withal; for he that talketh what
he knoweth, will also talk what he knoweth not; therefore set it down,
that a habit of secrecy is both politic and moral: and in this part
it is good that a mans face give his tongue leave to speak; for the
discovery of a mans self by the tracts[99] of his countenance, is a
great weakness and betraying, by how much it is many times more marked
and believed than a mans words.

For the second, which is dissimulation, it followeth many times upon
secrecy by a necessity; so that he that will be secret must be a
dissembler in some degree; for men are too cunning to suffer a man to
keep an indifferent carriage between both, and to be secret, without
swaying the balance on either side. They will so beset a man with
questions, and draw him on, and pick it out of him, that without an
absurd silence, he must show an inclination one way; or if he do not,
they will gather as much by his silence as by his speech. As for
equivocations, or oraculous speeches, they cannot hold out long: so
that no man can be secret, except he give himself a little scope of
dissimulation, which is, as it were, but the skirts or train of secrecy.

But for the third degree, which is simulation and false profession,
that I hold more culpable, and less politic, except it be in great and
rare matters; and, therefore, a general custom of simulation (which is
this last degree) is a vice rising either of a natural falseness, or
fearfulness, or of a mind that hath some main faults; which because a
man must needs disguise, it maketh him practise simulation in other
things, lest his hand should be out of use.

The advantages of simulation and dissimulation are three: first, to
lay asleep opposition, and to surprise; for, where a mans intentions
are published, it is an alarum to call up all that are against them:
the second is, to reserve to a mans self a fair retreat; for if a man
engage himself by a manifest declaration, he must go through or take
a fall: the third is, the better to discover the mind of another; for
to him that opens himself men will hardly show themselves adverse; but
will (fair) let him go on, and turn their freedom of speech to freedom
of thought; and therefore it is a good shrewd proverb of the Spaniard,
Tell a lie, and find a troth;[100] as if there were no way of
discovery but by simulation. There be also three disadvantages to set
it even; the first, that simulation and dissimulation commonly carry
with them a show of fearfulness, which, in any business, doth spoil the
feathers of round flying up to the mark; the second, that it puzzleth
and perplexeth the conceits of many, that, perhaps, would otherwise
coperate with him, and makes a man walk almost alone to his own ends:
the third, and greatest, is, that it depriveth a man of one of the most
principal instruments for action, which is trust and belief. The best
composition and temperature is, to have openness in fame and opinion,
secrecy in habit, dissimulation in seasonable use, and a power to feign
if there be no remedy.




BACON_No.6:
The joys of parents are secret, and so are their griefs and fears;
they cannot utter the one, nor they will not utter the other. Children
sweeten labors, but they make misfortunes more bitter; they increase
the cares of life, but they mitigate the remembrance of death. The
perpetuity by generation is common to beasts; but memory, merit, and
noble works, are proper to men: and surely a man shall see the noblest
works and foundations have proceeded from childless men, which have
sought to express the images of their minds where those of their bodies
have failed; so the care of posterity is most in them that have no
posterity. They that are the first raisers of their houses are most
indulgent towards their children, beholding them as the continuance,
not only of their kind, but of their work; and so both children and
creatures.

The difference in affection of parents towards their several children
is many times unequal, and sometimes unworthy, especially in the
mother; as Solomon saith, A wise son rejoiceth the father, but an
ungracious son shames the mother.[101] A man shall see, where there
is a house full of children, one or two of the eldest respected, and
the youngest made wantons;[102] but in the midst some that are, as
it were, forgotten, who many times, nevertheless, prove the best.
The illiberality of parents, in allowance towards their children, is
a harmful error, makes them base, acquaints them with shifts, makes
them sort with mean company, and makes them surfeit more when they
come to plenty; and, therefore, the proof[103] is best when men keep
their authority towards their children, but not their purse. Men have
a foolish manner (both parents, and schoolmasters, and servants), in
creating and breeding an emulation between brothers during childhood,
which many times sorteth[104] to discord when they are men, and
disturbeth families.[105] The Italians make little difference between
children and nephews, or near kinsfolk; but so they be of the lump,
they care not, though they pass not through their own body; and, to
say truth, in nature it is much a like matter; insomuch that we see a
nephew sometimes resembleth an uncle or a kinsman more than his own
parent, as the blood happens. Let parents choose betimes the vocations
and courses they mean their children should take, for then they are
most flexible; and let them not too much apply themselves to the
disposition of their children, as thinking they will take best to that
which they have most mind to. It is true, that if the affection or
aptness of the children be extraordinary, then it is good not to cross
it; but generally the precept is good, Optimum elige, suave et facile
illud faciet consuetudo.[106]Younger brothers are commonly fortunate,
but seldom or never where the elder are disinherited.




BACON_No.7:
He that hath wife and children hath given hostages to fortune; for
they are impediments to great enterprises, either of virtue or
mischief. Certainly the best works, and of greatest merit for the
public, have proceeded from the unmarried or childless men, which,
both in affection and means, have married and endowed the public.
Yet it were great reason that those that have children should have
greatest care of future times, unto which they know they must transmit
their dearest pledges. Some there are who, though they lead a single
life, yet their thoughts do end with themselves, and account future
times impertinences; nay, there are some other that account wife and
children but as bills of charges; nay more, there are some foolish,
rich, covetous men, that take a pride in having no children, because
they may be thought so much the richer; for, perhaps they have heard
some talk, Such an one is a great rich man, and another except to
it, Yea, but he hath a great charge of children; as if it were an
abatement to his riches. But the most ordinary cause of a single life
is liberty, especially in certain self-pleasing and humorous minds,
which are so sensible of every restraint, as they will go near to
think their girdles and garters to be bonds and shackles. Unmarried
men are best friends, best masters, best servants; but not always best
subjects, for they are light to run away, and almost all fugitives are
of that condition. A single life doth well with churchmen, for charity
will hardly water the ground where it must first fill a pool.[107]
It is indifferent for judges and magistrates; for if they be facile
and corrupt, you shall have a servant five times worse than a wife.
For soldiers, I find the generals commonly, in their hortatives, put
men in mind of their wives and children; and I think the despising
of marriage amongst the Turks maketh the vulgar soldier more base.
Certainly, wife and children are a kind of discipline of humanity; and
single men, though they be many times more charitable, because their
means are less exhaust, yet, on the other side, they are more cruel
and hard-hearted (good to make severe inquisitors), because their
tenderness is not so oft called upon. Grave natures, led by custom,
and therefore constant, are commonly loving husbands, as was said of
Ulysses, Vetulam suam praetulit immortalitati.[108] Chaste women are
often proud and froward, as presuming upon the merit of their chastity.
It is one of the best bonds, both of chastity and obedience, in the
wife, if she think her husband wise, which she will never do if she
find him jealous. Wives are young mens mistresses, companions for
middle age, and old mens nurses, so as a man may have a quarrel[109]
to marry when he will; but yet he was reputed one of the wise men that
made answer to the question when a man should marry, A young man not
yet, an elder man not at all.[110] It is often seen that bad husbands
have very good wives; whether it be that it raiseth the price of their
husbands kindness when it comes, or that the wives take a pride in
their patience; but this never fails, if the bad husbands were of their
own choosing, against their friends consent, for then they will be
sure to make good their own folly.

BACON_No.8:
The stage is more beholding[124] to love than the life of man; for as
to the stage, love is ever matter of comedies, and now and then of
tragedies; but in life it doth much mischief, sometimes like a Siren,
sometimes like a Fury. You may observe, that, amongst all the great
and worthy persons (whereof the memory remaineth, either ancient or
recent), there is not one that hath been transported to the mad degree
of love, which shows that great spirits and great business do keep out
this weak passion. You must except, nevertheless, Marcus Antonius,
the half partner of the empire of Rome, and Appius Claudius,[125] the
decemvir and lawgiver; whereof the former was indeed a voluptuous
man, and inordinate, but the latter was an austere and wise man; and
therefore it seems (though rarely) that love can find entrance, not
only into an open heart, but also into a heart well fortified, if watch
be not well kept. It is a poor saying of Epicurus, Satis magnum alter
alteri theatrum sumus;[126] as if man, made for the contemplation
of heaven and all noble objects, should do nothing but kneel before
a little idol, and make himself subject, though not of the mouth (as
beasts are) yet of the eye, which was given him for higher purposes.
It is a strange thing to note the excess of this passion, and how it
braves the nature and value of things, by this, that the speaking in
a perpetual hyperbole is comely in nothing but in love, neither is it
merely in the phrase; for whereas it hath been well said, That the
arch flatterer, with whom all the petty flatterers have intelligence,
is a mans self; certainly, the lover is more; for there was never
proud man thought so absurdly well of himself as the lover doth of the
person loved; and therefore it was well said, That it is impossible
to love and to be wise.[127] Neither doth this weakness appear to
others only, and not to the party loved, but to the loved most of
all, except the love be reciprocal; for it is a true rule, that love
is ever rewarded, either with the reciprocal, or with an inward and
secret contempt; by how much the more men ought to beware of this
passion, which loseth not only other things, but itself. As for the
other losses, the poets relation[128] doth well figure them: That
he that preferred Helena, quitted the gifts of Juno and Pallas; for
whosoever esteemeth too much of amorous affection, quitteth both riches
and wisdom. This passion hath his floods in the very times of weakness,
which are, great prosperity and great adversity, though this latter
hath been less observed; both which times kindle love, and make it more
fervent, and therefore show it to be the child of folly. They do best
who, if they cannot but admit love, yet make it keep quarter, and sever
it wholly from their serious affairs and actions of life; for if it
check once with business, it troubleth mens fortunes, and maketh men
that they can nowise be true to their own ends. I know not how, but
martial men are given to love; I think it is, but as they are given
to wine, for perils commonly ask to be paid in pleasures. There is in
mans nature a secret inclination and motion towards love of others,
which, if it be not spent upon some one or a few, doth naturally spread
itself towards many, and maketh men become humane and charitable, as it
is seen sometimes in friars. Nuptial love maketh mankind, friendly love
perfecteth it, but wanton love corrupted and embaseth it.

BACON_No.9:
It is a trivial grammar-school text, but yet worthy a wise mans
consideration. Question was asked of Demosthenes, what was the chief
part of an orator? He answered, Action. What next?Action. What next
again?Action.[139] He said it that knew it best, and had, by nature,
himself no advantage in that he commended. A strange thing, that that
part of an orator which is but superficial, and rather the virtue
of a player, should be placed so high above those other noble parts
of invention, elocution, and the rest; nay, almost alone, as if it
were all in all. But the reason is plain. There is in human nature
generally more of the fool than of the wise; and therefore, those
faculties by which the foolish part of mens minds is taken are most
potent. Wonderful like is the case of boldness in civil business. What
first?Boldness: what second and third?Boldness. And yet boldness is
a child of ignorance and baseness, far inferior to other parts; but,
nevertheless, it doth fascinate, and bind hand and foot those that are
either shallow in judgment or weak in courage, which are the greatest
part, yea, and prevaileth with wise man at weak times; therefore,
we see it hath done wonders in popular states, but with senates and
princes less, and more, ever upon the first entrance of bold persons
into action than soon after; for boldness is an ill keeper of
promise. Surely, as there are mountebanks for the natural body, so
are there mountebanks for the politic body; men that undertake great
cures, and perhaps have been lucky in two or three experiments, but
want the grounds of science, and therefore cannot hold out; nay, you
shall see a bold fellow many times do Mahomets miracle. Mahomet made
the people believe that he would call a hill to him, and from the top
of it offer up his prayers for the observers of his law. The people
assembled; Mahomet called the hill to come to him again and again;
and when the hill stood still, he was never a whit abashed, but said,
If the hill will not come to Mahomet, Mahomet will go to the hill.
So these men, when they have promised great matters and failed most
shamefully, yet, if they have the perfection of boldness, they will
but slight it over, and make a turn, and no more ado. Certainly, to
men of great judgment, bold persons are a sport to behold; nay, and
to the vulgar also boldness hath somewhat of the ridiculous; for if
absurdity be the subject of laughter, doubt you not but great boldness
is seldom without some absurdity; especially it is a sport to see when
a bold fellow is out of countenance, for that puts his face into a most
shrunken and wooden posture, as needs it must; for in bashfulness the
spirits do a little go and come, but with bold men, upon like occasion,
they stand at a stay; like a stale at chess, where it is no mate, but
yet the game cannot stir; but this last were fitter for a satire than
for a serious observation. This is well to be weighed, that boldness
is ever blind, for it seeth not dangers and inconveniences; therefore,
it is ill in counsel, good in execution; so that the right use of bold
persons is, that they never command in chief, but be seconds and under
the direction of others; for in counsel it is good to see dangers; and
in execution not to see them except they be very great.

BACON_No.10:

I take goodness in this sense, the affecting of the weal of men, which
is that the Grecians call philanthropia; and the word humanity, as
it is used, is a little too light to express it. Goodness I call the
habit, and goodness of nature the inclination. This, of all virtues
and dignities of the mind, is the greatest, being the character of
the Deity; and without it man is a busy, mischievous, wretched thing,
no better than a kind of vermin. Goodness answers to the theological
virtue charity, and admits no excess but error. The desire of power
in excess caused the angels to fall;[140] the desire of knowledge in
excess caused man to fall; but in charity there is no excess, neither
can angel or man come in danger by it. The inclination to goodness is
imprinted deeply in the nature of man, insomuch that if it issue not
towards men, it will take unto other living creatures; as it is seen
in the Turks, a cruel people, who nevertheless are kind to beasts, and
give alms to dogs and birds; insomuch, as Busbechius[141] reporteth,
a Christian boy in Constantinople had like to have been stoned for
gagging in a waggishness a longbilled fowl.[142] Errors, indeed, in
this virtue, of goodness or charity, may be committed. The Italians
have an ungracious proverb: Tanto buon che val niente; So good, that
he is good for nothing; and one of the doctors of Italy, Nicholas
Machiavel,[143] had the confidence to put in writing, almost in plain
terms, That the Christian faith had given up good men in prey to those
that are tyrannical and unjust;[144] which he spake, because, indeed,
there was never law, or sect, or opinion did so much magnify goodness
as the Christian religion doth; therefore, to avoid the scandal and the
danger both, it is good to take knowledge of the errors of a habit so
excellent. Seek the good of other men, but be not in bondage to their
faces or fancies; for that is but facility or softness, which taketh an
honest mind prisoner. Neither give thou sops cock a gem, who would
be better pleased and happier if he had had a barleycorn. The example
of God teacheth the lesson truly: He sendeth his rain, and maketh his
sun to shine upon the just and the unjust;[145] but he doth not rain
wealth, nor shine honor and virtues upon men equally; common benefits
are to be communicate with all, but peculiar benefits with choice. And
beware how, in making the portraiture, thou breakest the pattern; for
divinity maketh the love of ourselves the pattern, the love of our
neighbors but the portraiture: Sell all thou hast, and give it to the
poor, and follow me;[146] but sell not all thou hast, except thou
come and follow me; that is, except thou have a vocation wherein thou
mayest do as much good with little means as with great; for otherwise,
in feeding the streams thou driest the fountain. Neither is there only
a habit of goodness directed by right reason, but there is in some men,
even in nature, a disposition towards it; as, on the other side, there
is a natural malignity, for there be that in their nature do not affect
the good of others. The lighter sort of malignity turneth but to a
crossness, or frowardness, or aptness to oppose, or difficileness, or
the like; but the deeper sort to envy, and mere mischief. Such men in
other mens calamities are, as it were, in season, and are ever on the
loading part; not so good as the dogs that licked Lazaruss sores,[147]
but like flies that are still buzzing upon any thing that is raw;
misanthropi, that make it their practice to bring men to the bough, and
yet have never a tree for the purpose in their gardens, as Timon[148]
had. Such dispositions are the very errors of human nature, and yet
they are the fittest timber to make great politics of; like to knee
timber,[149] that is good for ships that are ordained to be tossed, but
not for building houses that shall stand firm. The parts and signs of
goodness are many. If a man be gracious and courteous to strangers, it
shows he is a citizen of the world, and that his heart is no island
cut off from other lands, but a continent that joins to them; if he
be compassionate towards the afflictions of others, it shows that his
heart is like the noble tree that is wounded itself when it gives the
balm;[150] if he easily pardons and remits offences, it shows that
his mind is planted above injuries, so that he cannot be shot; if he
be thankful for small benefits, it shows that he weighs mens minds,
and not their trash; but, above all, if he have St. Pauls perfection,
that he would wish to be an anathema[151] from Christ for the salvation
of his brethren, it shows much of a divine nature, and a kind of
conformity with Christ himself.

BACON_No.11:
We will speak of nobility, first, as a portion of an estate, then as a
condition of particular persons. A monarchy, where there is no nobility
at all, is ever a pure and absolute tyranny as that of the Turks; for
nobility attempers sovereignty, and draws the eyes of the people
somewhat aside from the line royal: but for democracies they need it
not; and they are commonly more quiet and less subject to sedition than
where there are stirps of nobles; for mens eyes are upon the business,
and not upon the persons; or if upon the persons, it is for the
business sake, as fittest, and not for flags and pedigree. We see the
Switzers last well, notwithstanding their diversity of religion and of
cantons; for utility is their bond, and not respects.[152] The United
Provinces of the Low Countries[153] in their government excel; for
where there is an equality the consultations are more indifferent, and
the payments and tributes more cheerful. A great and potent nobility
addeth majesty to a monarch, but diminisheth power, and putteth life
and spirit into the people, but presseth their fortune. It is well
when nobles are not too great for sovereignty nor for justice; and yet
maintained in that height, as the insolency of inferiors may be broken
upon them, before it come on too fast upon the majesty of kings. A
numerous nobility causeth poverty and inconvenience in a state, for it
is a surcharge of expense; and besides, it being of necessity that many
of the nobility fall in time to be weak in fortune, it maketh a kind of
disproportion between honor and means.

As for nobility in particular persons, it is a reverend thing to
see an ancient castle or building not in decay, or to see a fair
timbertree sound and perfect; how much more to behold an ancient noble
family, which hath stood against the waves and weathers of time! For
new nobility is but the act of power, but ancient nobility is the act
of time. Those that are first raised to nobility are commonly more
virtuous,[154] but less innocent than their descendants; for there is
rarely any rising but by a commixture of good and evil arts; but it
is reason the memory of their virtues remain to their posterity, and
their faults die with themselves. Nobility of birth commonly abateth
industry, and he that is not industrious, envieth him that is; besides,
noble persons cannot go much higher; and he that standeth at a stay
when others rise, can hardly avoid motions of envy.[155] On the other
side, nobility extinguisheth the passive envy from others towards them,
because they are in possession of honor. Certainly, kings that have
able men of their nobility shall find ease in employing them, and a
better slide into their business; for people naturally bend to them, as
born in some sort to command.

BACON_No.12:
I had rather believe all the fables in the legends,[183] and the
Talmud,[184] and the Alcoran, than that this universal frame is
without a mind; and, therefore, God never wrought miracle to convince
atheism, because his ordinary works convince it. It is true, that a
little philosophy[185] inclineth mans mind to atheism, but depth in
philosophy bringeth mens minds about to religion; for while the mind
of man looketh upon second causes scattered, it may sometimes rest
in them, and go no further; but when it beholdeth the chain of them
confederate, and linked together, it must needs fly to Providence and
Deity. Nay, even that school which is most accused of atheism, doth
most demonstrate religion: that is, the school of Leucippus,[186] and
Democritus,[187] and Epicurus; for it is a thousand times more credible
that four mutable elements, and one immutable fifth essence,[188] duly
and eternally placed, need no God, than that an army of infinite small
portions, or seeds unplaced, should have produced this order and beauty
without a divine marshal. The Scripture saith, The fool hath said
in his heart, there is no God;[189] it is not said, The fool hath
thought in his heart; so as he rather saith it by rote to himself,
as that he would have, than that he can thoroughly believe it, or be
persuaded of it; for none deny there is a God, but those for whom it
maketh[190] that there were no God. It appeareth in nothing more, that
atheism is rather in the lip than in the heart of man, than by this,
that atheists will ever be talking of that their opinion, as if they
fainted in it within themselves, and would be glad to be strengthened
by the consent of others; nay more, you shall have atheists strive
to get disciples, as it fareth with other sects; and, which is most
of all, you shall have of them that will suffer for atheism, and not
recant; whereas, if they did truly think that there were no such thing
as God, why should they trouble themselves? Epicurus is charged, that
he did but dissemble for his credits sake, when he affirmed there
were blessed natures, but such as enjoyed themselves without having
respect to the government of the world. Wherein they say he did
temporize, though in secret he thought there was no God; but certainly
he is traduced, for his words are noble and divine: Non Deos vulgi
negare profanum; sed vulgi opiniones Diis applicare profanum.[191]
Plato could have said no more; and, although he had the confidence to
deny the administration, he had not the power to deny the nature. The
Indians[192] of the west have names for their particular gods, though
they have no name for God; as if the heathens should have had the names
Jupiter, Apollo, Mars, &c., but not the word Deus, which shows that
even those barbarous people have the notion, though they have not the
latitude and extent of it; so that against atheists the very savages
take part with the very subtlest philosophers. The contemplative
atheist is rare; a Diagoras,[193] a Bion,[194] a Lucian,[195] perhaps,
and some others, and yet they seem to be more than they are; for
that all that impugn a received religion, or superstition, are, by
the adverse part, branded with the name of atheists. But the great
atheists indeed are hypocrites, which are ever handling holy things,
but without feeling, so as they must needs be cauterized in the end.
The causes of atheism are: divisions in religion, if they be many; for
any one main division addeth zeal to both sides, but many divisions
introduce atheism. Another is, scandal of priests, when it is come
to that which St. Bernard saith: Non est jam dicere, ut populus,
sic sacerdos; quia nec sic populus, ut sacerdos.[196] A third is,
custom of profane scoffing in holy matters, which doth by little and
little deface the reverence of religion: and lastly, learned times,
specially with peace and prosperity; for troubles and adversities do
more bow mens minds to religion. They that deny a God destroy a mans
nobility, for certainly man is of kin to the beasts by his body; and
if he be not of kin to God by his spirit, he is a base and ignoble
creature. It destroys likewise magnanimity, and the raising of human
nature; for, take an example of a dog, and mark what a generosity and
courage he will put on when he finds himself maintained by a man, who,
to him, is instead of a God, or melior natura;[197] which courage is
manifestly such as that creature, without that confidence of a better
nature than his own, could never attain. So man, when he resteth and
assureth himself upon divine protection and favor, gathereth a force
and faith, which human nature in itself could not obtain; therefore,
as atheism is in all respects hateful, so in this, that it depriveth
human nature of the means to exalt itself above human frailty. As it
is in particular persons, so it is in nations: never was there such a
state for magnanimity as Rome. Of this state hear what Cicero saith:
Quam volumus, licet, Patres conscripti, nos amemus, tamen nec numero
Hispanos, nec robore Gallos, nec calliditate Pnos, nec artibus
Grcos, nec denique hoc ipso hujus gentis et terr domestico nativoque
sensu Italos ipsos et Latinos; sed pietate, ac religione, atque hc
un sapienti, quod Deorum immortalium numine omnia regi, gubernarique
perspeximus, omnes gentes, nationesque superavimus.[198]

BACON_No.13:
It were better to have no opinion of God at all, than such an
opinion as is unworthy of him; for the one is unbelief, the other is
contumely,[199] and certainly superstition is the reproach of the
Deity. Plutarch saith well to that purpose: Surely, saith he, I
had rather a great deal men should say there was no such man at all
as Plutarch, than that they should say that there was one Plutarch
that would eat his children[200] as soon as they were born, as the
poets speak of Saturn; and, as the contumely is greater towards God,
so the danger is greater towards men. Atheism leaves a man to sense,
to philosophy, to natural piety, to laws, to reputation, all which may
be guides to an outward moral virtue, though religion were not; but
superstition dismounts all these, and erecteth an absolute monarchy
in the minds of men. Therefore atheism did never perturb states; for
it makes men wary of themselves, as looking no further, and we see
the times inclined to atheism (as the time of Augustus Csar) were
civil times; but superstition hath been the confusion of many states,
and bringeth in a new primum mobile,[201] that ravisheth all the
spheres of government. The master of superstition is the people, and
in all superstition wise men follow fools; and arguments are fitted
to practice in a reversed order. It was gravely said by some of the
prelates in the Council of Trent,[202] where the doctrine of the
schoolmen bare great sway, that the schoolmen were like astronomers,
which did feign eccentrics[203] and epicycles,[204] and such engines of
orbs to save[205] the phenomena, though they knew there were no such
things; and, in like manner, that the schoolmen had framed a number
of subtle and intricate axioms and theorems, to save the practice of
the Church. The causes of superstition are, pleasing and sensual rites
and ceremonies; excess of outward and pharisaical holiness; overgreat
reverence of traditions, which cannot but load the Church; the
stratagems of prelates for their own ambition and lucre; the favoring
too much of good intentions, which openeth the gate to conceits and
novelties; the taking an aim at divine matters by human, which cannot
but breed mixture of imaginations; and, lastly, barbarous times,
especially joined with calamities and disasters. Superstition, without
a veil, is a deformed thing; for, as it addeth deformity to an ape to
be so like a man, so the similitude of superstition to religion makes
it the more deformed; and as wholesome meat corrupteth to little worms,
so good forms and orders corrupt into a number of petty observances.
There is a superstition in avoiding superstition, when men think to
do best if they go furthest from the superstition formerly received;
therefore care would be had that (as it fareth in ill purgings) the
good be not taken away with the bad, which commonly is done when the
people is the reformer.

BACON_No.14:
Travel, in the younger sort, is a part of education; in the elder, a
part of experience. He that travelleth into a country before he hath
some entrance into the language, goeth to school, and not to travel.
That young men travel under some tutor or grave servant, I allow well,
so that he be such a one that hath the language, and hath been in the
country before; whereby he may be able to tell them what things are
worthy to be seen in the country where they go, what acquaintances they
are to seek, what exercises or discipline the place yieldeth; for else
young men shall go hooded, and look abroad little. It is a strange
thing that, in sea voyages, where there is nothing to be seen but sky
and sea, men should make diaries; but in land travel, wherein so much
is to be observed, for the most part they omit it, as if chance were
fitter to be registered than observation. Let diaries, therefore, be
brought in use. The things to be seen and observed are, the courts of
princes, especially when they give audience to ambassadors; the courts
of justice, while they sit and hear causes; and so of consistories[206]
ecclesiastic; the churches and monasteries, with the monuments which
are therein extant; the walls and fortifications of cities and towns;
and so the havens and harbors, antiquities and ruins, libraries,
colleges, disputations, and lectures, where any are; shipping and
navies; houses and gardens of state and pleasure, near great cities;
armories, arsenals, magazines, exchanges, burses, warehouses, exercises
of horsemanship, fencing, training of soldiers, and the like; comedies,
such whereunto the better sort of persons do resort; treasuries of
jewels and robes; cabinets and rarities; and, to conclude, whatsoever
is memorable in the places where they go, after all which the tutors
or servants ought to make diligent inquiry. As for triumphs, masks,
feasts, weddings, funerals, capital executions, and such shows, men
need not to be put in mind of them; yet they are not to be neglected.
If you will have a young man to put his travel into a little room,
and in short time to gather much, this you must do: first, as was
said, he must have some entrance into the language before he goeth;
then he must have such a servant, or tutor, as knoweth the country,
as was likewise said; let him carry with him also some card or book,
describing the country where he travelleth, which will be a good key
to his inquiry; let him keep also a diary; let him not stay long in
one city or town, more or less, as the place deserveth, but not long;
nay, when he stayeth in one city or town, let him change his lodging
from one end and part of the town to another, which is a great adamant
of acquaintance; let him sequester himself from the company of his
countrymen, and diet in such places where there is good company of the
nation where he travelleth; let him, upon his removes from one place
to another, procure recommendation to some person of quality residing
in the place whither he removeth, that he may use his favor in those
things he desireth to see or know: thus he may abridge his travel
with much profit. As for the acquaintance which is to be sought in
travel, that which is most of all profitable, is acquaintance with the
secretaries and employed men[207] of ambassadors, for so in travelling
in one country he shall suck the experience of many; let him also see
and visit eminent persons in all kinds which are of great name abroad,
that he may be able to tell how the life agreeth with the fame. For
quarrels, they are with care and discretion to be avoided; they are
commonly for mistresses, healths,[208] place, and words; and let a man
beware how he keepeth company with choleric and quarrelsome persons,
for they will engage him into their own quarrels. When a traveller
returneth home, let him not leave the countries where he hath travelled
altogether behind him, but maintain a correspondence by letters with
those of his acquaintance which are of most worth; and let his travel
appear rather in his discourse than in his apparel or gesture, and in
his discourse let him be rather advised in his answers, than forward
to tell stories; and let it appear that he doth not change his country
manners for those of foreign parts, but only prick in some flowers of
that he hath learned abroad into the customs of his own country.

BACON_No.15:
Fortune is like the market, where, many times, if you can stay a
little, the price will fall; and again, it is sometimes like Sibyllas
offer,[257] which at first offereth the commodity at full, then
consumeth part and part, and still holdeth up the price; for occasion
(as it is in the common verse) turneth a bald noddle,[258] after she
hath presented her locks in front, and no hold taken; or, at least,
turneth the handle of the bottle first to be received, and after the
belly, which is hard to clasp.[259] There is surely no greater wisdom
than well to time the beginnings and onsets of things. Dangers are no
more light, if they once seem light; and more dangers have deceived men
than forced them; nay, it were better to meet some dangers halfway,
though they come nothing near, than to keep too long a watch upon
their approaches; for if a man watch too long, it is odds he will
fall asleep. On the other side, to be deceived with too long shadows
(as some have been when the moon was low, and shone on their enemies
back), and so to shoot off before the time; or to teach dangers to
come on by over early buckling towards them, is another extreme. The
ripeness or unripeness of the occasion (as we said) must ever be well
weighed; and generally it is good to commit the beginnings of all great
actions to Argus with his hundred eyes, and the ends to Briareus with
his hundred hands, first to watch and then to speed; for the helmet of
Pluto,[260] which maketh the politic man go invisible, is secrecy in
the council, and celerity in the execution; for when things are once
come to the execution, there is no secrecy comparable to celerity; like
the motion of a bullet in the air, which flieth so swift as it outruns
the eye.

BACON_No.16:
We take cunning for a sinister, or crooked wisdom; and, certainly,
there is great difference between a cunning man and a wise man, not
only in point of honesty, but in point of ability. There be that can
pack the cards,[261] and yet cannot play well; so there are some that
are good in canvasses and factions, that are otherwise weak men. Again,
it is one thing to understand persons, and another thing to understand
matters; for many are perfect in mens humors that are not greatly
capable of the real part of business, which is the constitution of one
that hath studied men more than books. Such men are fitter for practice
than for counsel, and they are good but in their own alley. Turn them
to new men, and they have lost their aim; so as the old rule, to know a
fool from a wise man, Mitte ambos nudos ad ignotos, et videbis,[262]
doth scarce hold for them; and, because these cunning men are like
haberdashers[263] of small wares, it is not amiss to set forth their
shop.

It is a point of cunning to wait upon[264] him with whom you speak with
your eye, as the Jesuits give it in precept; for there be many wise men
that have secret hearts and transparent countenances; yet this would be
done with a demure abasing of your eye sometimes, as the Jesuits also
do use.

Another is, that when you have any thing to obtain of present dispatch,
you entertain and amuse the party with whom you deal with some other
discourse, that he be not too much awake to make objections. I knew a
counsellor and secretary that never came to Queen Elizabeth of England,
with bills to sign, but he would always first put her into some
discourse of estate,[265] that she might the less mind the bills.

The like surprise may be made by moving things[266] when the party is
in haste, and cannot stay to consider advisedly of that is moved.

If a man would cross a business that he doubts some other would
handsomely and effectually move, let him pretend to wish it well, and
move it himself, in such sort as may foil it.

The breaking off in the midst of that one was about to say, as if he
took himself up, breeds a greater appetite in him with whom you confer
to know more.

And because it works better when any thing seemeth to be gotten from
you by question than if you offer it of yourself, you may lay a bait
for a question, by showing another visage and countenance than you are
wont; to the end, to give occasion for the party to ask what the matter
is of the change, as Nehemiah[267] did: And I had not, before that
time, been sad before the king.

In things that are tender and unpleasing, it is good to break the ice
by some whose words are of less weight, and to reserve the more weighty
voice to come in as by chance, so that he may be asked the question
upon the others speech; as Narcissus did, in relating to Claudius the
marriage[268] of Messalina and Silius.

In things that a man would not be seen in himself, it is a point of
cunning to borrow the name of the world; as to say, The world says,
or There is a speech abroad.

I knew one, that when he wrote a letter, he would put that which was
most material in a postscript, as if it had been a bymatter.

I knew another, that when he came to have speech,[269] he would pass
over that that he intended most; and go forth and come back again, and
speak of it as a thing that he had almost forgot.

Some procure themselves to be surprised at such times as it is like
the party that they work upon will suddenly come upon them, and to be
found with a letter in their hand, or doing somewhat which they are not
accustomed, to the end they may be apposed of[270] those things which
of themselves they are desirous to utter.

It is a point of cunning to let fall those words in a mans own name,
which he would have another man learn and use, and thereupon take
advantage. I knew two that were competitors for the secretarys place
in Queen Elizabeths time, and yet kept good quarter[271] between
themselves, and would confer one with another upon the business; and
the one of them said, that to be a secretary in the declination of a
monarchy was a ticklish thing, and that he did not affect it;[272]
the other straight caught up those words, and discoursed with divers
of his friends, that he had no reason to desire to be secretary in
the declination of a monarchy. The first man took hold of it, and
found means it was told the queen, who, hearing of a declination of a
monarchy, took it so ill, as she would never after hear of the others
suit.

There is a cunning, which we in England call the turning of the cat in
the pan; which is, when that which a man says to another, he lays it
as if another had said it to him; and, to say truth, it is not easy,
when such a matter passed between two, to make it appear from which of
them it first moved and began.

It is a way that some men have, to glance and dart at others by
justifying themselves by negatives; as to say, This I do not;
as Tigellinus did towards Burrhus: Se non diversas spes, sed
incolumitatem imperatoris simpliciter spectare.[273]

Some have in readiness so many tales and stories, as there is nothing
they would insinuate, but they can wrap it into a tale;[274] which
serveth both to keep themselves more in guard, and to make others carry
it with more pleasure.

It is a good point of cunning for a man to shape the answer he would
have in his own words and propositions; for it makes the other party
stick the less.

It is strange how long some men will lie in wait to speak somewhat
they desire to say; and how far about they will fetch,[275] and how
many other matters they will beat over to come near it. It is a thing
of great patience, but yet of much use.

A sudden, bold, and unexpected question doth many times surprise a
man, and lay him open. Like to him, that, having changed his name, and
walking in Pauls,[276] another suddenly came behind him and called him
by his true name, whereat straightways he looked back.

But these small wares and petty points of cunning are infinite, and it
were a good deed to make a list of them; for that nothing doth more
hurt in a state than that cunning men pass for wise.

But certainly, some there are that know the resorts[277] and falls[278]
of business that cannot sink into the main of it;[279] like a house
that hath convenient stairs and entries, but never a fair room.
Therefore you shall see them find out pretty looses[280] in the
conclusion, but are noways able to examine or debate matters; and yet
commonly they take advantage of their inability, and would be thought
wits of direction. Some build rather upon the abusing of others, and
(as we now say) putting tricks upon them, than upon soundness of their
own proceedings; but Solomon saith: Prudens advertit ad gressus suos;
stultus divertit ad dolos.[281]

BACON_No.17:
An ant is a wise creature for itself, but it is a shrewd[282] thing
in an orchard or garden; and certainly, men that are great lovers of
themselves waste the public. Divide with reason between selflove and
society; and be so true to thyself as thou be not false to others,
specially to thy king and country. It is a poor centre of a mans
actions, himself. It is right earth; for that only stands fast upon
his own centre;[283] whereas all things that have affinity with the
heavens, move upon the centre of another, which they benefit. The
referring of all to a mans self is more tolerable in a sovereign
prince, because themselves are not only themselves, but their good and
evil is at the peril of the public fortune; but it is a desperate evil
in a servant to a prince, or a citizen in a republic; for whatsoever
affairs pass such a mans hands, he crooketh them to his own ends,
which must needs be often eccentric to the ends of his master or state.
Therefore, let princes or states choose such servants as have not this
mark; except they mean their service should be made but the accessary.
That which maketh the effect more pernicious is, that all proportion
is lost. It were disproportion enough for the servants good to be
preferred before the masters; but yet it is a greater extreme, when
a little good of the servant shall carry things against a great good
of the master. And yet that is the case of bad officers, treasurers,
ambassadors, generals, and other false and corrupt servants; which
set a bias upon their bowl, of their own petty ends and envies, to
the overthrow of their masters great and important affairs; and, for
the most part, the good such servants receive is after the model of
their own fortune; but the hurt they sell for that good is after the
model of their masters fortune. And certainly, it is the nature of
extreme selflovers, as they will set a house on fire, an it were but
to roast their eggs; and yet these men many times hold credit with
their masters, because their study is but to please them, and profit
themselves; and for either respect they will abandon the good of their
affairs.

Wisdom for a mans self is, in many branches thereof, a depraved
thing. It is the wisdom of rats, that will be sure to leave a house
somewhat before it fall; it is the wisdom of the fox, that thrusts
out the badger who digged and made room for him; it is the wisdom of
crocodiles, that shed tears when they would devour. But that which is
specially to be noted is, that those which (as Cicero says of Pompey)
are sui amantes, sine rivali,[284] are many times unfortunate; and
whereas they have all their times sacrificed to themselves, they become
in the end themselves sacrifices to the inconstancy of fortune, whose
wings they thought by their selfwisdom to have pinioned.

BACON_No.18:
As the births of living creatures at first are illshapen, so are
all innovations, which are the births of time; yet, notwithstanding,
as those that first bring honor into their family are commonly more
worthy than most that succeed, so the first precedent (if it be good)
is seldom attained by imitation; for ill to mans nature as it stands
perverted, hath a natural motion strongest in continuance, but good,
as a forced motion, strongest at first. Surely, every medicine[285]
is an innovation, and he that will not apply new remedies must expect
new evils, for time is the greatest innovator; and if time, of course,
alter things to the worse, and wisdom and counsel shall not alter
them to the better, what shall be the end? It is true, that what is
settled by custom, though it be not good, yet, at least, it is fit;
and those things which have long gone together, are, as it were,
confederate within themselves;[286] whereas new things piece not so
well; but, though they help by their utility, yet they trouble by their
inconformity; besides, they are like strangers, more admired and less
favored. All this is true, if time stood still, which, contrariwise,
moveth so round, that a froward retention of custom is as turbulent
a thing as an innovation; and they that reverence too much old times
are but a scorn to the new. It were good, therefore, that men in their
innovations would follow the example of time itself, which indeed
innovateth greatly, but quietly, and by degrees scarce to be perceived;
for, otherwise, whatsoever is new is unlooked for, and ever it
mends some and pairs[287] other; and he that is holpen, takes it for
a fortune, and thanks the time; and he that is hurt, for a wrong, and
imputeth it to the author. It is good, also, not to try experiments in
states, except the necessity be urgent, or the utility evident; and
well to beware that it be the reformation that draweth on the change,
and not the desire of change that pretendeth the reformation; and
lastly, that the novelty, though it be not rejected, yet be held for
a suspect,[288] and, as the Scripture saith, That we make a stand
upon the ancient way, and then look about us, and discover what is the
straight and right way, and so to walk in it.[289]

BACON_No.19:
Affected dispatch is one of the most dangerous things to business
that can be; it is like that which the physicians call predigestion,
or hasty digestion, which is sure to fill the body full of crudities,
and secret seeds of diseases. Therefore, measure not dispatch by the
times of sitting, but by the advancement of the business; and as in
races, it is not the large stride, or high lift, that makes the speed,
so in business, the keeping close to the matter, and not taking of it
too much at once, procureth dispatch. It is the care of some, only to
come off speedily for the time, or to contrive some false periods of
business, because they may seem men of dispatch; but it is one thing to
abbreviate by contracting,[290] another by cutting off; and business so
handled at several sittings, or meetings, goeth commonly backward and
forward in an unsteady manner. I knew a wise man[291] that had it for
a byword, when he saw men hasten to a conclusion, Stay a little, that
we may make an end the sooner.

On the other side, true dispatch is a rich thing; for time is the
measure of business, as money is of wares; and business is bought at
a dear hand where there is small dispatch. The Spartans and Spaniards
have been noted to be of small dispatch: Mi venga la muerte de
Spagna; Let my death come from Spain; for then it will be sure to be
long in coming.

Give good hearing to those that give the first information in business,
and rather direct them in the beginning, than interrupt them in the
continuance of their speeches; for he that is put out of his own order
will go forward and backward, and be more tedious while he waits upon
his memory, than he could have been if he had gone on in his own
course; but sometimes it is seen that the moderator is more troublesome
than the actor.

Iterations are commonly loss of time; but there is no such gain of time
as to iterate often the state of the question; for it chaseth away many
a frivolous speech as it is coming forth. Long and curious speeches
are as fit for dispatch as a robe, or mantle, with a long train, is
for a race. Prefaces, and passages,[292] and excusations,[293] and
other speeches of reference to the person, are great wastes of time;
and though they seem to proceed of modesty, they are bravery.[294]
Yet beware of being too material when there is any impediment, or
obstruction in mens wills; for preoccupation of mind[295] ever
requireth preface of speech, like a fomentation to make the unguent
enter.

Above all things, order and distribution, and singling out of parts,
is the life of dispatch, so as the distribution be not too subtile;
for he that doth not divide will never enter well into business; and
he that divideth too much will never come out of it clearly. To choose
time is to save time; and an unseasonable motion is but beating the
air. There be three parts of business,the preparation; the debate, or
examination; and the perfection. Whereof, if you look for dispatch, let
the middle only be the work of many, and the first and last the work of
few. The proceeding, upon somewhat conceived in writing, doth for the
most part facilitate dispatch; for though it should be wholly rejected,
yet that negative is more pregnant of direction than an indefinite, as
ashes are more generative than dust.
