  SHAKESPEARE_No.1:
  From fairest creatures we desire increase,
  That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
  But as the riper should by time decease,
  His tender heir might bear his memory:
  But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
  Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel,
  Making a famine where abundance lies,
  Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
  Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament,
  And only herald to the gaudy spring,
  Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
  And tender churl mak'st waste in niggarding:
    Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
    To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.2:
  When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
  And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
  Thy youth's proud livery so gazed on now,
  Will be a tatter'd weed of small worth held:
  Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,
  Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;
  To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes,
  Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.
  How much more praise deserv'd thy beauty's use,
  If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
  Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,'
  Proving his beauty by succession thine!
    This were to be new made when thou art old,
    And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.3:
  Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest
  Now is the time that face should form another;
  Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
  Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
  For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb
  Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
  Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
  Of his self-love to stop posterity?
  Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee
  Calls back the lovely April of her prime;
  So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
  Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
    But if thou live, remember'd not to be,
    Die single and thine image dies with thee.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.4:
  Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend
  Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy?
  Nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend,
  And being frank she lends to those are free:
  Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse
  The bounteous largess given thee to give?
  Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
  So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live?
  For having traffic with thy self alone,
  Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive:
  Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
  What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
    Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
    Which, used, lives th' executor to be.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.5:
  Those hours, that with gentle work did frame
  The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
  Will play the tyrants to the very same
  And that unfair which fairly doth excel;
  For never-resting time leads summer on
  To hideous winter, and confounds him there;
  Sap checked with frost, and lusty leaves quite gone,
  Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where:
  Then were not summer's distillation left,
  A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
  Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
  Nor it, nor no remembrance what it was:
    But flowers distill'd, though they with winter meet,
    Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.6:
  Then let not winter's ragged hand deface,
  In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd:
  Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
  With beauty's treasure ere it be self-kill'd.
  That use is not forbidden usury,
  Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
  That's for thy self to breed another thee,
  Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;
  Ten times thy self were happier than thou art,
  If ten of thine ten times refigur'd thee:
  Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
  Leaving thee living in posterity?
    Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair
    To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.7:
  Lo! in the orient when the gracious light
  Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
  Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
  Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
  And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill,
  Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
  Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
  Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
  But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,
  Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day,
  The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are
  From his low tract, and look another way:
    So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon:
    Unlook'd, on diest unless thou get a son.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.8:
  Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
  Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
  Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly,
  Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
  If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
  By unions married, do offend thine ear,
  They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
  In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.
  Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
  Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
  Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
  Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
    Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
    Sings this to thee: 'Thou single wilt prove none.'

  SHAKESPEARE_No.9:
  Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye,
  That thou consum'st thy self in single life?
  Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
  The world will wail thee like a makeless wife;
  The world will be thy widow and still weep
  That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
  When every private widow well may keep
  By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind:
  Look! what an unthrift in the world doth spend
  Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
  But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
  And kept unused the user so destroys it.
    No love toward others in that bosom sits
    That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.10:
  For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any,
  Who for thy self art so unprovident.
  Grant, if thou wilt, thou art belov'd of many,
  But that thou none lov'st is most evident:
  For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate,
  That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire,
  Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
  Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
  O! change thy thought, that I may change my mind:
  Shall hate be fairer lodg'd than gentle love?
  Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
  Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
    Make thee another self for love of me,
    That beauty still may live in thine or thee.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.11:
  As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st,
  In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
  And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st,
  Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest,
  Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase;
  Without this folly, age, and cold decay:
  If all were minded so, the times should cease
  And threescore year would make the world away.
  Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
  Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish:
  Look, whom she best endow'd, she gave thee more;
  Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
    She carv'd thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
    Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.12:
  When I do count the clock that tells the time,
  And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
  When I behold the violet past prime,
  And sable curls, all silvered o'er with white;
  When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
  Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
  And summer's green all girded up in sheaves,
  Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard,
  Then of thy beauty do I question make,
  That thou among the wastes of time must go,
  Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
  And die as fast as they see others grow;
    And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
    Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.13:
  O! that you were your self; but, love you are
  No longer yours, than you your self here live:
  Against this coming end you should prepare,
  And your sweet semblance to some other give:
  So should that beauty which you hold in lease
  Find no determination; then you were
  Yourself again, after yourself's decease,
  When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
  Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
  Which husbandry in honour might uphold,
  Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
  And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
    O! none but unthrifts. Dear my love, you know,
    You had a father: let your son say so.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.14:
  Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck;
  And yet methinks I have astronomy,
  But not to tell of good or evil luck,
  Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality;
  Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
  Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
  Or say with princes if it shall go well
  By oft predict that I in heaven find:
  But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
  And constant stars in them I read such art
  As 'Truth and beauty shall together thrive,
  If from thyself, to store thou wouldst convert';
    Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
    'Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.'

  SHAKESPEARE_No.15:
  When I consider every thing that grows
  Holds in perfection but a little moment,
  That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
  Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
  When I perceive that men as plants increase,
  Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky,
  Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
  And wear their brave state out of memory;
  Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
  Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
  Where wasteful Time debateth with decay
  To change your day of youth to sullied night,
    And all in war with Time for love of you,
    As he takes from you, I engraft you new.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.16:
  But wherefore do not you a mightier way
  Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?
  And fortify your self in your decay
  With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
  Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
  And many maiden gardens, yet unset,
  With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
  Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
  So should the lines of life that life repair,
  Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen,
  Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
  Can make you live your self in eyes of men.
    To give away yourself, keeps yourself still,
    And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.17:
  Who will believe my verse in time to come,
  If it were fill'd with your most high deserts?
  Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
  Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts.
  If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
  And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
  The age to come would say 'This poet lies;
  Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.'
  So should my papers, yellow'd with their age,
  Be scorn'd, like old men of less truth than tongue,
  And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage
  And stretched metre of an antique song:
    But were some child of yours alive that time,
    You should live twice,--in it, and in my rhyme.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.18:
  Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
  Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
  Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
  And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
  Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
  And often is his gold complexion dimm'd,
  And every fair from fair sometime declines,
  By chance, or nature's changing course untrimm'd:
  But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
  Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
  Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
  When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st,
    So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
    So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.19:
  Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
  And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
  Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
  And burn the long-liv'd phoenix, in her blood;
  Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
  And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
  To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
  But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
  O! carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
  Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen;
  Him in thy course untainted do allow
  For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
    Yet, do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong,
    My love shall in my verse ever live young.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.20:
  A woman's face with nature's own hand painted,
  Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion;
  A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
  With shifting change, as is false women's fashion:
  An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
  Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
  A man in hue all 'hues' in his controlling,
  Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
  And for a woman wert thou first created;
  Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting,
  And by addition me of thee defeated,
  By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
    But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure,
    Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.21:
  So is it not with me as with that Muse,
  Stirr'd by a painted beauty to his verse,
  Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
  And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
  Making a couplement of proud compare.
  With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems,
  With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare,
  That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
  O! let me, true in love, but truly write,
  And then believe me, my love is as fair
  As any mother's child, though not so bright
  As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air:
    Let them say more that like of hearsay well;
    I will not praise that purpose not to sell.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.22:
  My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
  So long as youth and thou are of one date;
  But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
  Then look I death my days should expiate.
  For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
  Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
  Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me:
  How can I then be elder than thou art?
  O! therefore love, be of thyself so wary
  As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
  Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
  As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
    Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain,
    Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.23:
  As an unperfect actor on the stage,
  Who with his fear is put beside his part,
  Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
  Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart;
  So I, for fear of trust, forget to say
  The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
  And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
  O'ercharg'd with burthen of mine own love's might.
  O! let my looks be then the eloquence
  And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
  Who plead for love, and look for recompense,
  More than that tongue that more hath more express'd.
    O! learn to read what silent love hath writ:
    To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.24:
  Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd,
  Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
  My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
  And perspective it is best painter's art.
  For through the painter must you see his skill,
  To find where your true image pictur'd lies,
  Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
  That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
  Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:
  Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
  Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
  Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
    Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
    They draw but what they see, know not the heart.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.25:
  Let those who are in favour with their stars
  Of public honour and proud titles boast,
  Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars
  Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
  Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
  But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
  And in themselves their pride lies buried,
  For at a frown they in their glory die.
  The painful warrior famoused for fight,
  After a thousand victories once foil'd,
  Is from the book of honour razed quite,
  And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd:
    Then happy I, that love and am belov'd,
    Where I may not remove nor be remov'd.

SHAKESPEARE_No.26:
SCENE: Rome, the conspirators' camp near Sardis,  and the plains
of Philippi.


ACT I. SCENE I.
Rome. A street.

Enter Flavius, Marullus, and certain Commoners.

  FLAVIUS. Hence, home, you idle creatures, get you home.
    Is this a holiday? What, know you not,
    Being mechanical, you ought not walk
    Upon a laboring day without the sign
    Of your profession? Speak, what trade art thou?
  FIRST COMMONER. Why, sir, a carpenter.
  MARULLUS. Where is thy leather apron and thy rule?
    What dost thou with thy best apparel on?
    You, sir, what trade are you?
  SECOND COMMONER. Truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, I am
    but, as you would say, a cobbler.
  MARULLUS. But what trade art thou? Answer me directly.
  SECOND COMMONER. A trade, sir, that, I hope, I may use with a safe
    conscience, which is indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.
  MARULLUS. What trade, thou knave? Thou naughty knave, what trade?
  SECOND COMMONER. Nay, I beseech you, sir, be not out with me; yet,
    if you be out, sir, I can mend you.
  MARULLUS. What mean'st thou by that? Mend me, thou saucy fellow!
  SECOND COMMONER. Why, sir, cobble you.
  FLAVIUS. Thou art a cobbler, art thou?
  SECOND COMMONER. Truly, Sir, all that I live by is with the awl; I
    meddle with no tradesman's matters, nor women's matters, but with awl.
   I am indeed, sir, a surgeon to old shoes; when they are in
    great danger, I recover them. As proper men as ever trod upon
    neat's leather have gone upon my handiwork.
  FLAVIUS. But wherefore art not in thy shop today?
    Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?
  SECOND COMMONER. Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes to get myself
    into more work. But indeed, sir, we make holiday to see Caesar
    and to rejoice in his triumph.
  MARULLUS. Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings he home?
    What tributaries follow him to Rome
    To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels?
    You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things!
    O you hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome,
    Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft
    Have you climb'd up to walls and battlements,
    To towers and windows, yea, to chimney tops,
    Your infants in your arms, and there have sat
    The livelong day with patient expectation
    To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome.
    And when you saw his chariot but appear,
    Have you not made an universal shout
    That Tiber trembled underneath her banks
    To hear the replication of your sounds
    Made in her concave shores?
    And do you now put on your best attire?
    And do you now cull out a holiday?
    And do you now strew flowers in his way
    That comes in triumph over Pompey's blood?
    Be gone!
    Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
    Pray to the gods to intermit the plague
    That needs must light on this ingratitude.
  FLAVIUS. Go, go, good countrymen, and, for this fault,
    Assemble all the poor men of your sort,
    Draw them to Tiber banks, and weep your tears
    Into the channel, till the lowest stream
    Do kiss the most exalted shores of all.
                                           Exeunt all Commoners.
    See whether their basest metal be not moved;
    They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness.
    Go you down that way towards the Capitol;
    This way will I. Disrobe the images
    If you do find them deck'd with ceremonies.
  MARULLUS. May we do so?
    You know it is the feast of Lupercal.
  FLAVIUS. It is no matter; let no images
    Be hung with Caesar's trophies. I'll about
    And drive away the vulgar from the streets;
    So do you too, where you perceive them thick.
    These growing feathers pluck'd from Caesar's wing
    Will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
    Who else would soar above the view of men
    And keep us all in servile fearfulness.              Exeunt.




SCENE II.
A public place.

Flourish. Enter Caesar; Antony, for the course; Calpurnia, Portia,
Decius, Cicero, Brutus, Cassius, and Casca; a great crowd follows,
among them a Soothsayer.

  CAESAR. Calpurnia!
  CASCA. Peace, ho! Caesar speaks.
                                                   Music ceases.
  CAESAR. Calpurnia!
  CALPURNIA. Here, my lord.
  CAESAR. Stand you directly in Antonio's way,
    When he doth run his course. Antonio!
  ANTONY. Caesar, my lord?
  CAESAR. Forget not in your speed, Antonio,
    To touch Calpurnia, for our elders say
    The barren, touched in this holy chase,
    Shake off their sterile curse.
  ANTONY. I shall remember.
    When Caesar says 'Do this,' it is perform'd.
  CAESAR. Set on, and leave no ceremony out.           Flourish.
  SOOTHSAYER. Caesar!
  CAESAR. Ha! Who calls?
  CASCA. Bid every noise be still. Peace yet again!
  CAESAR. Who is it in the press that calls on me?
    I hear a tongue, shriller than all the music,
    Cry 'Caesar.' Speak, Caesar is turn'd to hear.
  SOOTHSAYER. Beware the ides of March.
  CAESAR. What man is that?
  BRUTUS. A soothsayer you beware the ides of March.
  CAESAR. Set him before me let me see his face.
  CASSIUS. Fellow, come from the throng; look upon Caesar.
  CAESAR. What say'st thou to me now? Speak once again.
  SOOTHSAYER. Beware the ides of March.
  CAESAR. He is a dreamer; let us leave him. Pass.
                      Sennet. Exeunt all but Brutus and Cassius.
  CASSIUS. Will you go see the order of the course?
  BRUTUS. Not I.
  CASSIUS. I pray you, do.
  BRUTUS. I am not gamesome; I do lack some part
    Of that quick spirit that is in Antony.
    Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires;
    I'll leave you.
  CASSIUS. Brutus, I do observe you now of late;
    I have not from your eyes that gentleness
    And show of love as I was wont to have;
    You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand
    Over your friend that loves you.
  BRUTUS. Cassius,
    Be not deceived; if I have veil'd my look,
    I turn the trouble of my countenance
    Merely upon myself. Vexed I am
    Of late with passions of some difference,
    Conceptions only proper to myself,
    Which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors;
    But let not therefore my good friends be grieved-
    Among which number, Cassius, be you one-
    Nor construe any further my neglect
    Than that poor Brutus with himself at war
    Forgets the shows of love to other men.
  CASSIUS. Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion,
    By means whereof this breast of mine hath buried
    Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.
    Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?
  BRUTUS. No, Cassius, for the eye sees not itself
    But by reflection, by some other things.
  CASSIUS. 'Tis just,
    And it is very much lamented, Brutus,
    That you have no such mirrors as will turn
    Your hidden worthiness into your eye
    That you might see your shadow. I have heard
    Where many of the best respect in Rome,
    Except immortal Caesar, speaking of Brutus
    And groaning underneath this age's yoke,
    Have wish'd that noble Brutus had his eyes.
  BRUTUS. Into what dangers would you lead me, Cassius,
    That you would have me seek into myself
    For that which is not in me?
  CASSIUS. Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear,
    And since you know you cannot see yourself
    So well as by reflection, I your glass
    Will modestly discover to yourself
    That of yourself which you yet know not of.
    And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus;
    Were I a common laugher, or did use
    To stale with ordinary oaths my love
    To every new protester, if you know
    That I do fawn on men and hug them hard
    And after scandal them, or if you know
    That I profess myself in banqueting
    To all the rout, then hold me dangerous.
                                             Flourish and shout.
  BRUTUS. What means this shouting? I do fear the people
    Choose Caesar for their king.
  CASSIUS. Ay, do you fear it?
    Then must I think you would not have it so.
  BRUTUS. I would not, Cassius, yet I love him well.
    But wherefore do you hold me here so long?
    What is it that you would impart to me?
    If it be aught toward the general good,
    Set honor in one eye and death i' the other
    And I will look on both indifferently.
    For let the gods so speed me as I love
    The name of honor more than I fear death.
  CASSIUS. I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus,
    As well as I do know your outward favor.
    Well, honor is the subject of my story.
    I cannot tell what you and other men
    Think of this life, but, for my single self,
    I had as lief not be as live to be
    In awe of such a thing as I myself.
    I was born free as Caesar, so were you;
    We both have fed as well, and we can both
    Endure the winter's cold as well as he.
    For once, upon a raw and gusty day,
    The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores,
    Caesar said to me, 'Darest thou, Cassius, now
    Leap in with me into this angry flood
    And swim to yonder point?' Upon the word,
    Accoutred as I was, I plunged in
    And bade him follow. So indeed he did.
    The torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it
    With lusty sinews, throwing it aside
    And stemming it with hearts of controversy.
    But ere we could arrive the point proposed,
    Caesar cried, 'Help me, Cassius, or I sink!
    I, as Aeneas our great ancestor
    Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder
    The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber
    Did I the tired Caesar. And this man
    Is now become a god, and Cassius is
    A wretched creature and must bend his body
    If Caesar carelessly but nod on him.
    He had a fever when he was in Spain,
    And when the fit was on him I did mark
    How he did shake. 'Tis true, this god did shake;
    His coward lips did from their color fly,
    And that same eye whose bend doth awe the world
    Did lose his luster. I did hear him groan.
    Ay, and that tongue of his that bade the Romans
    Mark him and write his speeches in their books,
    Alas, it cried, 'Give me some drink, Titinius,'
    As a sick girl. Ye gods! It doth amaze me
    A man of such a feeble temper should
    So get the start of the majestic world
    And bear the palm alone. Shout.                    Flourish.
  BRUTUS. Another general shout!
    I do believe that these applauses are
    For some new honors that are heap'd on Caesar.
  CASSIUS. Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world
    Like a Colossus, and we petty men
    Walk under his huge legs and peep about
    To find ourselves dishonorable graves.
    Men at some time are masters of their fates:
    The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
    But in ourselves that we are underlings.
    Brutus and Caesar: what should be in that 'Caesar'?
    Why should that name be sounded more than yours?
    Write them together, yours is as fair a name;
    Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well;
    Weigh them, it is as heavy; conjure with 'em,
    'Brutus' will start a spirit as soon as 'Caesar.'
    Now, in the names of all the gods at once,
    Upon what meat doth this our Caesar feed
    That he is grown so great? Age, thou art shamed!
    Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods!
    When went there by an age since the great flood
    But it was famed with more than with one man?
    When could they say till now that talk'd of Rome
    That her wide walls encompass'd but one man?
    Now is it Rome indeed, and room enough,
    When there is in it but one only man.
    O, you and I have heard our fathers say
    There was a Brutus once that would have brook'd
    The eternal devil to keep his state in Rome
    As easily as a king.
  BRUTUS. That you do love me, I am nothing jealous;
    What you would work me to, I have some aim.
    How I have thought of this and of these times,
    I shall recount hereafter; for this present,
    I would not, so with love I might entreat you,
    Be any further moved. What you have said
    I will consider; what you have to say
    I will with patience hear, and find a time
    Both meet to hear and answer such high things.
    Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:
    Brutus had rather be a villager
    Than to repute himself a son of Rome
    Under these hard conditions as this time
    Is like to lay upon us.
  CASSIUS. I am glad that my weak words
    Have struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus.

            Re-enter Caesar and his Train.

  BRUTUS. The games are done, and Caesar is returning.
  CASSIUS. As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,
    And he will, after his sour fashion, tell you
    What hath proceeded worthy note today.
  BRUTUS. I will do so. But, look you, Cassius,
    The angry spot doth glow on Caesar's brow,
    And all the rest look like a chidden train:
    Calpurnia's cheek is pale, and Cicero
    Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes
    As we have seen him in the Capitol,
    Being cross'd in conference by some senators.
  CASSIUS. Casca will tell us what the matter is.
  CAESAR. Antonio!
  ANTONY. Caesar?
  CAESAR. Let me have men about me that are fat,
    Sleek-headed men, and such as sleep o' nights:
    Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look;
    He thinks too much; such men are dangerous.
  ANTONY. Fear him not, Caesar; he's not dangerous;
    He is a noble Roman and well given.
  CAESAR. Would he were fatter! But I fear him not,
    Yet if my name were liable to fear,
    I do not know the man I should avoid
    So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much,
    He is a great observer, and he looks
    Quite through the deeds of men. He loves no plays,
    As thou dost, Antony; he hears no music;
    Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort
    As if he mock'd himself and scorn'd his spirit
    That could be moved to smile at anything.
    Such men as he be never at heart's ease
    Whiles they behold a greater than themselves,
    And therefore are they very dangerous.
    I rather tell thee what is to be fear'd
    Than what I fear, for always I am Caesar.
    Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,
    And tell me truly what thou think'st of him.
              Sennet. Exeunt Caesar and all his Train but Casca.
  CASCA. You pull'd me by the cloak; would you speak with me?
  BRUTUS. Ay, Casca, tell us what hath chanced today
    That Caesar looks so sad.
  CASCA. Why, you were with him, were you not?
  BRUTUS. I should not then ask Casca what had chanced.
  CASCA. Why, there was a crown offered him, and being offered him,
     he put it by with the back of his hand, thus, and then the
     people fell ashouting.
  BRUTUS. What was the second noise for?
  CASCA. Why, for that too.
  CASSIUS. They shouted thrice. What was the last cry for?
  CASCA. Why, for that too.
  BRUTUS. Was the crown offered him thrice?
  CASCA. Ay, marry, wast, and he put it by thrice, every time gentler
    than other, and at every putting by mine honest neighbors
    shouted.
  CASSIUS. Who offered him the crown?
  CASCA. Why, Antony.
  BRUTUS. Tell us the manner of it, gentle Casca.
  CASCA. I can as well be hang'd as tell the manner of it. It was
    mere foolery; I did not mark it. I saw Mark Antony offer him a
    crown (yet 'twas not a crown neither, 'twas one of these
    coronets) and, as I told you, he put it by once. But for all
    that, to my thinking, he would fain have had it. Then he offered
    it to him again; then he put it by again. But, to my thinking, he
    was very loath to lay his fingers off it. And then he offered it
    the third time; he put it the third time by; and still as he
    refused it, the rabblement hooted and clapped their chopped hands
    and threw up their sweaty nightcaps and uttered such a deal of
    stinking breath because Caesar refused the crown that it had
    almost choked Caesar, for he swounded and fell down at it. And
    for mine own part, I durst not laugh for fear of opening my lips
    and receiving the bad air.
  CASSIUS. But, soft, I pray you, what, did Caesars wound?
  CASCA. He fell down in the marketplace and foamed at mouth and was
    speechless.
  BRUTUS. 'Tis very like. He hath the falling sickness.
  CASSIUS. No, Caesar hath it not, but you, and I,
    And honest Casca, we have the falling sickness.
  CASCA. I know not what you mean by that, but I am sure Caesar fell
    down. If the tagrag people did not clap him and hiss him
    according as he pleased and displeased them, as they use to do
    the players in the theatre, I am no true man.
  BRUTUS. What said he when he came unto himself?
  CASCA. Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the common
    herd was glad he refused the crown, he plucked me ope his doublet
    and offered them his throat to cut. An had been a man of any
    occupation, if I would not have taken him at a word, I would I
    might go to hell among the rogues. And so he fell. When he came
    to himself again, he said, if he had done or said anything amiss,
    he desired their worships to think it was his infirmity. Three or
    four wenches where I stood cried, 'Alas, good soul!' and forgave
    him with all their hearts. But there's no heed to be taken of
    them; if Caesar had stabbed their mothers, they would have done
    no less.
  BRUTUS. And after that he came, thus sad, away?
  CASCA. Ay.
  CASSIUS. Did Cicero say anything?
  CASCA. Ay, he spoke Greek.
  CASSIUS. To what effect?
  CASCA. Nay, an I tell you that, I'll ne'er look you i' the face
    again; but those that understood him smiled at one another and
    shook their heads; but for mine own part, it was Greek to me. I
    could tell you more news too: Marullus and Flavius, for pulling
    scarfs off Caesar's images, are put to silence. Fare you well.
    There was more foolery yet, if could remember it.
  CASSIUS. Will you sup with me tonight, Casca?
  CASCA. No, I am promised forth.
  CASSIUS. Will you dine with me tomorrow?
  CASCA. Ay, if I be alive, and your mind hold, and your dinner worth
    the eating.
  CASSIUS. Good, I will expect you.
  CASCA. Do so, farewell, both.                            Exit.
  BRUTUS. What a blunt fellow is this grown to be!
    He was quick mettle when he went to school.
  CASSIUS. So is he now in execution
    Of any bold or noble enterprise,
    However he puts on this tardy form.
    This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit,
    Which gives men stomach to digest his words
    With better appetite.
  BRUTUS. And so it is. For this time I will leave you.
    Tomorrow, if you please to speak with me,
    I will come home to you, or, if you will,
    Come home to me and I will wait for you.
  CASSIUS. I will do so. Till then, think of the world.
                                                    Exit Brutus.
    Well, Brutus, thou art noble; yet, I see
    Thy honorable mettle may be wrought
    From that it is disposed; therefore it is meet
    That noble minds keep ever with their likes;
    For who so firm that cannot be seduced?
    Caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves Brutus.
    If I were Brutus now and he were Cassius,
    He should not humor me. I will this night,
    In several hands, in at his windows throw,
    As if they came from several citizens,
    Writings, all tending to the great opinion
    That Rome holds of his name, wherein obscurely
    Caesar's ambition shall be glanced at.
    And after this let Caesar seat him sure;
    For we will shake him, or worse days endure.           Exit.




SCENE III.
A street. Thunder and lightning.

Enter, from opposite sides, Casca, with his sword drawn, and
Cicero.

  CICERO. Good even, Casca. Brought you Caesar home?
    Why are you breathless, and why stare you so?
  CASCA. Are not you moved, when all the sway of earth
    Shakes like a thing unfirm? O Cicero,
    I have seen tempests when the scolding winds
    Have rived the knotty oaks, and I have seen
    The ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam
    To be exalted with the threatening clouds,
    But never till tonight, never till now,
    Did I go through a tempest dropping fire.
    Either there is a civil strife in heaven,
    Or else the world too saucy with the gods
    Incenses them to send destruction.
  CICERO. Why, saw you anything more wonderful?
  CASCA. A common slave- you know him well by sight-
    Held up his left hand, which did flame and burn
    Like twenty torches join'd, and yet his hand
    Not sensible of fire remain'd unscorch'd.
    Besides- I ha' not since put up my sword-
    Against the Capitol I met a lion,
    Who glaz'd upon me and went surly by
    Without annoying me. And there were drawn
    Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women
    Transformed with their fear, who swore they saw
    Men all in fire walk up and down the streets.
    And yesterday the bird of night did sit
    Even at noonday upon the marketplace,
    Howling and shrieking. When these prodigies
    Do so conjointly meet, let not men say
    'These are their reasons; they are natural':
    For I believe they are portentous things
    Unto the climate that they point upon.
  CICERO. Indeed, it is a strange-disposed time.
    But men may construe things after their fashion,
    Clean from the purpose of the things themselves.
    Comes Caesar to the Capitol tomorrow?
  CASCA. He doth, for he did bid Antonio
    Send word to you he would be there tomorrow.
  CICERO. Good then, Casca. This disturbed sky
    Is not to walk in.
  CASCA. Farewell, Cicero.                          Exit Cicero.

                        Enter Cassius.

  CASSIUS. Who's there?
  CASCA. A Roman.
  CASSIUS. Casca, by your voice.
  CASCA. Your ear is good. Cassius, what night is this!
  CASSIUS. A very pleasing night to honest men.
  CASCA. Who ever knew the heavens menace so?
  CASSIUS. Those that have known the earth so full of faults.
    For my part, I have walk'd about the streets,
    Submitting me unto the perilous night,
    And thus unbraced, Casca, as you see,
    Have bared my bosom to the thunderstone;
    And when the cross blue lightning seem'd to open
    The breast of heaven, I did present myself
    Even in the aim and very flash of it.
  CASCA. But wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens?
    It is the part of men to fear and tremble
    When the most mighty gods by tokens send
    Such dreadful heralds to astonish us.
  CASSIUS. You are dull, Casca, and those sparks of life
    That should be in a Roman you do want,
    Or else you use not. You look pale and gaze
    And put on fear and cast yourself in wonder
    To see the strange impatience of the heavens.
    But if you would consider the true cause
    Why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts,
    Why birds and beasts from quality and kind,
    Why old men, fools, and children calculate,
    Why all these things change from their ordinance,
    Their natures, and preformed faculties
    To monstrous quality, why, you shall find
    That heaven hath infused them with these spirits
    To make them instruments of fear and warning
    Unto some monstrous state.
    Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man
    Most like this dreadful night,
    That thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars
    As doth the lion in the Capitol,
    A man no mightier than thyself or me
    In personal action, yet prodigious grown
    And fearful, as these strange eruptions are.
  CASCA. 'Tis Caesar that you mean, is it not, Cassius?
  CASSIUS. Let it be who it is, for Romans now
    Have thews and limbs like to their ancestors.
    But, woe the while! Our fathers' minds are dead,
    And we are govern'd with our mothers' spirits;
    Our yoke and sufferance show us womanish.
  CASCA. Indeed they say the senators tomorrow
    Mean to establish Caesar as a king,
    And he shall wear his crown by sea and land
    In every place save here in Italy.
  CASSIUS. I know where I will wear this dagger then:
    Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius.
    Therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong;
    Therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat.
    Nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass,
    Nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron
    Can be retentive to the strength of spirit;
    But life, being weary of these worldly bars,
    Never lacks power to dismiss itself.
    If I know this, know all the world besides,
    That part of tyranny that I do bear
    I can shake off at pleasure.                  Thunder still.
  CASCA. So can I.
    So every bondman in his own hand bears
    The power to cancel his captivity.
  CASSIUS. And why should Caesar be a tyrant then?
    Poor man! I know he would not be a wolf
    But that he sees the Romans are but sheep.
    He were no lion, were not Romans hinds.
    Those that with haste will make a mighty fire
    Begin it with weak straws. What trash is Rome,
    What rubbish, and what offal, when it serves
    For the base matter to illuminate
    So vile a thing as Caesar? But, O grief,
    Where hast thou led me? I perhaps speak this
    Before a willing bondman; then I know
    My answer must be made. But I am arm'd,
    And dangers are to me indifferent.
  CASCA. You speak to Casca, and to such a man
    That is no fleering tell-tale. Hold, my hand.
    Be factious for redress of all these griefs,
    And I will set this foot of mine as far
    As who goes farthest.
  CASSIUS. There's a bargain made.
    Now know you, Casca, I have moved already
    Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans
    To undergo with me an enterprise
    Of honorable-dangerous consequence;
    And I do know by this, they stay for me
    In Pompey's Porch. For now, this fearful night,
    There is no stir or walking in the streets,
    And the complexion of the element
    In favor's like the work we have in hand,
    Most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.

                       Enter Cinna.

  CASCA. Stand close awhile, for here comes one in haste.
  CASSIUS. 'Tis Cinna, I do know him by his gait;
    He is a friend. Cinna, where haste you so?
  CINNA. To find out you. Who's that? Metellus Cimber?
  CASSIUS. No, it is Casca, one incorporate
    To our attempts. Am I not stay'd for, Cinna?
  CINNA. I am glad on't. What a fearful night is this!
    There's two or three of us have seen strange sights.
  CASSIUS. Am I not stay'd for? Tell me.
  CINNA. Yes, you are.
    O Cassius, if you could
    But win the noble Brutus to our party-
  CASSIUS. Be you content. Good Cinna, take this paper,
    And look you lay it in the praetor's chair,
    Where Brutus may but find it; and throw this
    In at his window; set this up with wax
    Upon old Brutus' statue. All this done,
    Repair to Pompey's Porch, where you shall find us.
    Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?
  CINNA. All but Metellus Cimber, and he's gone
    To seek you at your house. Well, I will hie
    And so bestow these papers as you bade me.
  CASSIUS. That done, repair to Pompey's Theatre.
                                                     Exit Cinna.
    Come, Casca, you and I will yet ere day
    See Brutus at his house. Three parts of him
    Is ours already, and the man entire
    Upon the next encounter yields him ours.
  CASCA. O, he sits high in all the people's hearts,
    And that which would appear offense in us,
    His countenance, like richest alchemy,
    Will change to virtue and to worthiness.
  CASSIUS. Him and his worth and our great need of him
    You have right well conceited. Let us go,
    For it is after midnight, and ere day
    We will awake him and be sure of him.                Exeunt.


ACT II. SCENE I.

Enter Brutus in his orchard.

  BRUTUS. What, Lucius, ho!
    I cannot, by the progress of the stars,
    Give guess how near to day. Lucius, I say!
    I would it were my fault to sleep so soundly.
    When, Lucius, when? Awake, I say! What, Lucius!

                            Enter Lucius.

  LUCIUS. Call'd you, my lord?
  BRUTUS. Get me a taper in my study, Lucius.
    When it is lighted, come and call me here.
  LUCIUS. I will, my lord.                                 Exit.
  BRUTUS. It must be by his death, and, for my part,
    I know no personal cause to spurn at him,
    But for the general. He would be crown'd:
    How that might change his nature, there's the question.
    It is the bright day that brings forth the adder
    And that craves wary walking. Crown him that,
    And then, I grant, we put a sting in him
    That at his will he may do danger with.
    The abuse of greatness is when it disjoins
    Remorse from power, and, to speak truth of Caesar,
    I have not known when his affections sway'd
    More than his reason. But 'tis a common proof
    That lowliness is young ambition's ladder,
    Whereto the climber-upward turns his face;
    But when he once attains the upmost round,
    He then unto the ladder turns his back,
    Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees
    By which he did ascend. So Caesar may;
    Then, lest he may, prevent. And, since the quarrel
    Will bear no color for the thing he is,
    Fashion it thus, that what he is, augmented,
    Would run to these and these extremities;
    And therefore think him as a serpent's egg
    Which hatch'd would as his kind grow mischievous,
    And kill him in the shell.

                        Re-enter Lucius.

  LUCIUS. The taper burneth in your closet, sir.
    Searching the window for a flint I found
    This paper thus seal'd up, and I am sure
    It did not lie there when I went to bed.
                                           Gives him the letter.
  BRUTUS. Get you to bed again, it is not day.
    Is not tomorrow, boy, the ides of March?
  LUCIUS. I know not, sir.
  BRUTUS. Look in the calendar and bring me word.
  LUCIUS. I will, sir.                                     Exit.
  BRUTUS. The exhalations whizzing in the air
    Give so much light that I may read by them.
                                     Opens the letter and reads.
    'Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake and see thyself!
    Shall Rome, etc. Speak, strike, redress!'

    'Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake!'
    Such instigations have been often dropp'd
    Where I have took them up.
    'Shall Rome, etc.' Thus must I piece it out.
    Shall Rome stand under one man's awe? What, Rome?
    My ancestors did from the streets of Rome
    The Tarquin drive, when he was call'd a king.
    'Speak, strike, redress!' Am I entreated
    To speak and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise,
    If the redress will follow, thou receivest
    Thy full petition at the hand of Brutus!

                        Re-enter Lucius.

  LUCIUS. Sir, March is wasted fifteen days.
                                                Knocking within.
  BRUTUS. 'Tis good. Go to the gate, somebody knocks.
                                                    Exit Lucius.
    Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar
    I have not slept.
    Between the acting of a dreadful thing
    And the first motion, all the interim is
    Like a phantasma or a hideous dream;
    The genius and the mortal instruments
    Are then in council, and the state of man,
    Like to a little kingdom, suffers then
    The nature of an insurrection.

                         Re-enter Lucius.

  LUCIUS. Sir, 'tis your brother Cassius at the door,
    Who doth desire to see you.
  BRUTUS. Is he alone?
  LUCIUS. No, sir, there are more with him.
  BRUTUS. Do you know them?
  LUCIUS. No, sir, their hats are pluck'd about their ears,
    And half their faces buried in their cloaks,
    That by no means I may discover them
    By any mark of favor.
  BRUTUS. Let 'em enter.                            Exit Lucius.
    They are the faction. O Conspiracy,
    Shamest thou to show thy dangerous brow by night,
    When evils are most free? O, then, by day
    Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough
    To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none, Conspiracy;
    Hide it in smiles and affability;
    For if thou path, thy native semblance on,
    Not Erebus itself were dim enough
    To hide thee from prevention.

    Enter the conspirators, Cassius, Casca, Decius, Cinna,
                Metellus Cimber, and Trebonius.

  CASSIUS. I think we are too bold upon your rest.
    Good morrow, Brutus, do we trouble you?
  BRUTUS. I have been up this hour, awake all night.
    Know I these men that come along with you?
  CASSIUS. Yes, every man of them, and no man here
    But honors you, and every one doth wish
    You had but that opinion of yourself
    Which every noble Roman bears of you.
    This is Trebonius.
  BRUTUS. He is welcome hither.
  CASSIUS. This, Decius Brutus.
  BRUTUS. He is welcome too.
CASSIUS. This, Casca; this, Cinna; and this, Metellus Cimber.
  BRUTUS. They are all welcome.
    What watchful cares do interpose themselves
    Betwixt your eyes and night?
  CASSIUS. Shall I entreat a word?                 They whisper.
  DECIUS. Here lies the east. Doth not the day break here?
  CASCA. No.
  CINNA. O, pardon, sir, it doth, and yongrey lines
    That fret the clouds are messengers of day.
  CASCA. You shall confess that you are both deceived.
    Here, as I point my sword, the sun arises,
    Which is a great way growing on the south,
    Weighing the youthful season of the year.
    Some two months hence up higher toward the north
    He first presents his fire, and the high east
    Stands as the Capitol, directly here.
  BRUTUS. Give me your hands all over, one by one.
  CASSIUS. And let us swear our resolution.
  BRUTUS. No, not an oath. If not the face of men,
    The sufferance of our souls, the time's abuse-
    If these be motives weak, break off betimes,
    And every man hence to his idle bed;
    So let high-sighted tyranny range on
    Till each man drop by lottery. But if these,
    As I am sure they do, bear fire enough
    To kindle cowards and to steel with valor
    The melting spirits of women, then, countrymen,
    What need we any spur but our own cause
    To prick us to redress? What other bond
    Than secret Romans that have spoke the word
    And will not palter? And what other oath
    Than honesty to honesty engaged
    That this shall be or we will fall for it?
    Swear priests and cowards and men cautelous,
    Old feeble carrions and such suffering souls
    That welcome wrongs; unto bad causes swear
    Such creatures as men doubt; but do not stain
    The even virtue of our enterprise,
    Nor the insuppressive mettle of our spirits,
    To think that or our cause or our performance
    Did need an oath; when every drop of blood
    That every Roman bears, and nobly bears,
    Is guilty of a several bastardy
    If he do break the smallest particle
    Of any promise that hath pass'd from him.
  CASSIUS. But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him?
    I think he will stand very strong with us.
  CASCA. Let us not leave him out.
  CINNA. No, by no means.
  METELLUS. O, let us have him, for his silver hairs
    Will purchase us a good opinion,
    And buy men's voices to commend our deeds.
    It shall be said his judgement ruled our hands;
    Our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
    But all be buried in his gravity.
  BRUTUS. O, name him not; let us not break with him,
    For he will never follow anything
    That other men begin.
  CASSIUS. Then leave him out.
  CASCA. Indeed he is not fit.
  DECIUS. Shall no man else be touch'd but only Caesar?
  CASSIUS. Decius, well urged. I think it is not meet
    Mark Antony, so well beloved of Caesar,
    Should outlive Caesar. We shall find of him
    A shrewd contriver; and you know his means,
    If he improve them, may well stretch so far
    As to annoy us all, which to prevent,
    Let Antony and Caesar fall together.
  BRUTUS. Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius,
    To cut the head off and then hack the limbs
    Like wrath in death and envy afterwards;
    For Antony is but a limb of Caesar.
    Let us be sacrificers, but not butchers, Caius.
    We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar,
    And in the spirit of men there is no blood.
    O, that we then could come by Caesar's spirit,
    And not dismember Caesar! But, alas,
    Caesar must bleed for it! And, gentle friends,
    Let's kill him boldly, but not wrathfully;
    Let's carve him as a dish fit for the gods,
    Not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds;
    And let our hearts, as subtle masters do,
    Stir up their servants to an act of rage
    And after seem to chide 'em. This shall make
    Our purpose necessary and not envious,
    Which so appearing to the common eyes,
    We shall be call'd purgers, not murderers.
    And for Mark Antony, think not of him,
    For he can do no more than Caesar's arm
    When Caesar's head is off.
  CASSIUS. Yet I fear him,
    For in the ingrated love he bears to Caesar-
  BRUTUS. Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him.
    If he love Caesar, all that he can do
    Is to himself, take thought and die for Caesar.
    And that were much he should, for he is given
    To sports, to wildness, and much company.
  TREBONIUS. There is no fear in him-let him not die,
    For he will live and laugh at this hereafter.
                                                  Clock strikes.
  BRUTUS. Peace, count the clock.
  CASSIUS. The clock hath stricken three.
  TREBONIUS. 'Tis time to part.
  CASSIUS. But it is doubtful yet
    Whether Caesar will come forth today or no,
    For he is superstitious grown of late,
    Quite from the main opinion he held once
    Of fantasy, of dreams, and ceremonies.
    It may be these apparent prodigies,
    The unaccustom'd terror of this night,
    And the persuasion of his augurers
    May hold him from the Capitol today.
  DECIUS. Never fear that. If he be so resolved,
    I can o'ersway him, for he loves to hear
    That unicorns may be betray'd with trees,
    And bears with glasses, elephants with holes,
    Lions with toils, and men with flatterers;
    But when I tell him he hates flatterers,
    He says he does, being then most flattered.
    Let me work;
    For I can give his humor the true bent,
    And I will bring him to the Capitol.
  CASSIUS. Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.
  BRUTUS. By the eighth hour. Is that the utter most?
  CINNA. Be that the uttermost, and fail not then.
  METELLUS. Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard,
    Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey.
    I wonder none of you have thought of him.
  BRUTUS. Now, good Metellus, go along by him.
    He loves me well, and I have given him reasons;
    Send him but hither, and I'll fashion him.
  CASSIUS. The morning comes upon 's. We'll leave you, Brutus,
    And, friends, disperse yourselves, but all remember
    What you have said and show yourselves true Romans.
  BRUTUS. Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily;
    Let not our looks put on our purposes,
    But bear it as our Roman actors do,
    With untired spirits and formal constancy.
    And so, good morrow to you every one.
                                          Exeunt all but Brutus.
    Boy! Lucius! Fast asleep? It is no matter.
    Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber;
    Thou hast no figures nor no fantasies,
    Which busy care draws in the brains of men;
    Therefore thou sleep'st so sound.

                           Enter Portia.

  PORTIA. Brutus, my lord!
  BRUTUS. Portia, what mean you? Wherefore rise you now?
    It is not for your health thus to commit
    Your weak condition to the raw cold morning.
  PORTIA. Nor for yours neither. have ungently, Brutus,
    Stole from my bed; and yesternight at supper
    You suddenly arose and walk'd about,
    Musing and sighing, with your arms across;
    And when I ask'd you what the matter was,
    You stared upon me with ungentle looks.
    I urged you further; then you scratch'd your head,
    And too impatiently stamp'd with your foot.
    Yet I insisted, yet you answer'd not,
    But with an angry waiter of your hand
    Gave sign for me to leave you. So I did,
    Fearing to strengthen that impatience
    Which seem'd too much enkindled, and withal
    Hoping it was but an effect of humor,
    Which sometime hath his hour with every man.
    It will not let you eat, nor talk, nor sleep,
    And, could it work so much upon your shape
    As it hath much prevail'd on your condition,
    I should not know you, Brutus. Dear my lord,
    Make me acquainted with your cause of grief.
  BRUTUS. I am not well in health, and that is all.
  PORTIA. Brutus is wise, and, were he not in health,
    He would embrace the means to come by it.
  BRUTUS. Why, so I do. Good Portia, go to bed.
  PORTIA. Is Brutus sick, and is it physical
    To walk unbraced and suck up the humors
    Of the dank morning? What, is Brutus sick,
    And will he steal out of his wholesome bed
    To dare the vile contagion of the night
    And tempt the rheumy and unpurged air
    To add unto his sickness? No, my Brutus,
    You have some sick offense within your mind,
    Which by the right and virtue of my place
    I ought to know of; and, upon my knees,
    I charm you, by my once commended beauty,
    By all your vows of love and that great vow
    Which did incorporate and make us one,
    That you unfold to me, yourself, your half,
    Why you are heavy and what men tonight
    Have had resort to you; for here have been
    Some six or seven, who did hide their faces
    Even from darkness.
  BRUTUS. Kneel not, gentle Portia.
  PORTIA. I should not need, if you were gentle Brutus.
    Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus,
    Is it excepted I should know no secrets
    That appertain to you? Am I yourself
    But, as it were, in sort or limitation,
    To keep with you at meals, comfort your bed,
    And talk to you sometimes? Dwell I but in the suburbs
    Of your good pleasure? If it be no more,
    Portia is Brutus' harlot, not his wife.
  BRUTUS. You are my true and honorable wife,
    As dear to me as are the ruddy drops
    That visit my sad heart.
  PORTIA. If this were true, then should I know this secret.
    I grant I am a woman, but withal
    A woman that Lord Brutus took to wife.
    I grant I am a woman, but withal
    A woman well reputed, Cato's daughter.
    Think you I am no stronger than my sex,
    Being so father'd and so husbanded?
    Tell me your counsels, I will not disclose 'em.
    I have made strong proof of my constancy,
    Giving myself a voluntary wound
    Here in the thigh. Can I bear that with patience
    And not my husband's secrets?
  BRUTUS. O ye gods,
    Render me worthy of this noble wife! Knocking within.
    Hark, hark, one knocks. Portia, go in awhile,
    And by and by thy bosom shall partake
    The secrets of my heart.
    All my engagements I will construe to thee,
    All the charactery of my sad brows.
    Leave me with haste. [Exit Portia.] Lucius, who's that knocks?

                  Re-enter Lucius with Ligarius.

  LUCIUS. Here is a sick man that would speak with you.
  BRUTUS. Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spake of.
    Boy, stand aside. Caius Ligarius, how?
  LIGARIUS. Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.
  BRUTUS. O, what a time have you chose out, brave Caius,
    To wear a kerchief! Would you were not sick!
  LIGARIUS. I am not sick, if Brutus have in hand
    Any exploit worthy the name of honor.
  BRUTUS. Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,
    Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.
  LIGARIUS. By all the gods that Romans bow before,
    I here discard my sickness! Soul of Rome!
    Brave son, derived from honorable loins!
    Thou, like an exorcist, hast conjured up
    My mortified spirit. Now bid me run,
    And I will strive with things impossible,
    Yea, get the better of them. What's to do?
  BRUTUS. A piece of work that will make sick men whole.
  LIGARIUS. But are not some whole that we must make sick?
  BRUTUS. That must we also. What it is, my Caius,
    I shall unfold to thee, as we are going
    To whom it must be done.
  LIGARIUS. Set on your foot,
    And with a heart new-fired I follow you,
    To do I know not what; but it sufficeth
    That Brutus leads me on.
  BRUTUS. Follow me then.                                Exeunt.




SCENE II.
Caesar's house. Thunder and lightning.

Enter Caesar, in his nightgown.

  CAESAR. Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight.
    Thrice hath Calpurnia in her sleep cried out,
    'Help, ho! They murther Caesar!' Who's within?

                         Enter a Servant.

  SERVANT. My lord?
  CAESAR. Go bid the priests do present sacrifice,
    And bring me their opinions of success.
  SERVANT. I will, my lord.                                Exit.

                         Enter Calpurnia.

  CALPURNIA. What mean you, Caesar? Think you to walk forth?
    You shall not stir out of your house today.
  CAESAR. Caesar shall forth: the things that threaten'd me
    Ne'er look'd but on my back; when they shall see
    The face of Caesar, they are vanished.
  CALPURNIA. Caesar, I I stood on ceremonies,
    Yet now they fright me. There is one within,
    Besides the things that we have heard and seen,
    Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch.
    A lioness hath whelped in the streets;
    And graves have yawn'd, and yielded up their dead;
    Fierce fiery warriors fight upon the clouds,
    In ranks and squadrons and right form of war,
    Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol;
    The noise of battle hurtled in the air,
    Horses did neigh and dying men did groan,
    And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets.
    O Caesar! These things are beyond all use,
    And I do fear them.
  CAESAR. What can be avoided
    Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods?
    Yet Caesar shall go forth, for these predictions
    Are to the world in general as to Caesar.
  CALPURNIA. When beggars die, there are no comets seen;
    The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.
  CAESAR. Cowards die many times before their deaths;
    The valiant never taste of death but once.
    Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,
    It seems to me most strange that men should fear
    Seeing that death, a necessary end,
    Will come when it will come.

                      Re-enter Servant.

    What say the augurers?
  SERVANT. They would not have you to stir forth today.
    Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
    They could not find a heart within the beast.
  CAESAR. The gods do this in shame of cowardice.
    Caesar should be a beast without a heart
    If he should stay at home today for fear.
    No, Caesar shall not. Danger knows full well
    That Caesar is more dangerous than he.
    We are two lions litter'd in one day,
    And I the elder and more terrible.
    And Caesar shall go forth.
  CALPURNIA. Alas, my lord,
    Your wisdom is consumed in confidence.
    Do not go forth today. Call it my fear
    That keeps you in the house and not your own.
    We'll send Mark Antony to the Senate House,
    And he shall say you are not well today.
    Let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.
  CAESAR. Mark Antony shall say I am not well,
    And, for thy humor, I will stay at home.

                        Enter Decius.

    Here's Decius Brutus, he shall tell them so.
  DECIUS. Caesar, all hail! Good morrow, worthy Caesar!
    I come to fetch you to the Senate House.
  CAESAR. And you are come in very happy time
    To bear my greeting to the senators
    And tell them that I will not come today.
    Cannot, is false, and that I dare not, falser:
    I will not come today. Tell them so, Decius.
  CALPURNIA. Say he is sick.
  CAESAR. Shall Caesar send a lie?
    Have I in conquest stretch'd mine arm so far
    To be afeard to tell greybeards the truth?
    Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.
  DECIUS. Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause,
    Lest I be laugh'd at when I tell them so.
  CAESAR. The cause is in my will: I will not come,
    That is enough to satisfy the Senate.
    But, for your private satisfaction,
    Because I love you, I will let you know.
    Calpurnia here, my wife, stays me at home;
    She dreamt tonight she saw my statue,
    Which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts,
    Did run pure blood, and many lusty Romans
    Came smiling and did bathe their hands in it.
    And these does she apply for warnings and portents
    And evils imminent, and on her knee
    Hath begg'd that I will stay at home today.
  DECIUS. This dream is all amiss interpreted;
    It was a vision fair and fortunate.
    Your statue spouting blood in many pipes,
    In which so many smiling Romans bathed,
    Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck
    Reviving blood, and that great men shall press
    For tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance.
    This by Calpurnia's dream is signified.
  CAESAR. And this way have you well expounded it.
  DECIUS. I have, when you have heard what I can say.
    And know it now, the Senate have concluded
    To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar.
    If you shall send them word you will not come,
    Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock
    Apt to be render'd, for someone to say
    'Break up the Senate till another time,
    When Caesar's wife shall meet with better dreams.'
    If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper
    'Lo, Caesar is afraid'?
    Pardon me, Caesar, for my dear dear love
    To your proceeding bids me tell you this,
    And reason to my love is liable.
  CAESAR. How foolish do your fears seem now, Calpurnia!
    I am ashamed I did yield to them.
    Give me my robe, for I will go.

         Enter Publius, Brutus, Ligarius, Metellus, Casca,
                     Trebonius, and Cinna.

    And look where Publius is come to fetch me.
  PUBLIUS. Good morrow,Caesar.
  CAESAR. Welcome, Publius.
    What, Brutus, are you stirr'd so early too?
    Good morrow, Casca. Caius Ligarius,
    Caesar was ne'er so much your enemy
    As that same ague which hath made you lean.
    What is't o'clock?
  BRUTUS. Caesar, 'tis strucken eight.
  CAESAR. I thank you for your pains and courtesy.

                           Enter Antony.

    See, Antony, that revels long o' nights,
    Is notwithstanding up. Good morrow, Antony.
  ANTONY. So to most noble Caesar.
  CAESAR. Bid them prepare within.
    I am to blame to be thus waited for.
    Now, Cinna; now, Metellus; what, Trebonius,
    I have an hour's talk in store for you;
    Remember that you call on me today;
    Be near me, that I may remember you.
  TREBONIUS. Caesar, I will. [Aside.] And so near will I be
    That your best friends shall wish I had been further.
  CAESAR. Good friends, go in and taste some wine with me,
    And we like friends will straightway go together.
  BRUTUS. [Aside.] That every like is not the same, O Caesar,
    The heart of Brutus yearns to think upon!            Exeunt.




SCENE III.
A street near the Capitol.

Enter Artemidorus, reading paper.

  ARTEMIDORUS. 'Caesar, beware of Brutus; take heed of Cassius; come
    not near Casca; have an eye to Cinna; trust not Trebonius; mark
    well Metellus Cimber; Decius Brutus loves thee not; thou hast
    wronged Caius Ligarius. There is but one mind in all these men,
    and it is bent against Caesar. If thou beest not immortal, look
    about you. Security gives way to conspiracy. The mighty gods
    defend thee!
                                        Thy lover, Artemidorus.'
    Here will I stand till Caesar pass along,
    And as a suitor will I give him this.
    My heart laments that virtue cannot live
    Out of the teeth of emulation.
    If thou read this, O Caesar, thou mayest live;
    If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.           Exit.




SCENE IV.
Another part of the same street, before the house of Brutus.

Enter Portia and Lucius.

  PORTIA. I prithee, boy, run to the Senate House;
    Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone.
    Why dost thou stay?
  LUCIUS. To know my errand, madam.
  PORTIA. I would have had thee there, and here again,
    Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.
    O constancy, be strong upon my side!
    Set a huge mountain 'tween my heart and tongue!
    I have a man's mind, but a woman's might.
    How hard it is for women to keep counsel!
    Art thou here yet?
  LUCIUS. Madam, what should I do?
    Run to the Capitol, and nothing else?
    And so return to you, and nothing else?
  PORTIA. Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well,
    For he went sickly forth; and take good note
    What Caesar doth, what suitors press to him.
    Hark, boy, what noise is that?
  LUCIUS. I hear none, madam.
  PORTIA. Prithee, listen well.
    I heard a bustling rumor like a fray,
    And the wind brings it from the Capitol.
  LUCIUS. Sooth, madam, I hear nothing.

                     Enter the Soothsayer.

  PORTIA. Come hither, fellow;
    Which way hast thou been?
  SOOTHSAYER. At mine own house, good lady.
  PORTIA. What is't o'clock?
  SOOTHSAYER. About the ninth hour, lady.
  PORTIA. Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?
  SOOTHSAYER. Madam, not yet. I go to take my stand
    To see him pass on to the Capitol.
  PORTIA. Thou hast some suit to Caesar, hast thou not?
  SOOTHSAYER. That I have, lady. If it will please Caesar
    To be so good to Caesar as to hear me,
    I shall beseech him to befriend himself.
  PORTIA. Why, know'st thou any harm's intended towards him?
  SOOTHSAYER. None that I know will be, much that I fear may
chance.
    Good morrow to you. Here the street is narrow,
    The throng that follows Caesar at the heels,
    Of senators, of praetors, common suitors,
    Will crowd a feeble man almost to death.
    I'll get me to a place more void and there
    Speak to great Caesar as he comes along.               Exit.
  PORTIA. I must go in. Ay me, how weak a thing
    The heart of woman is! O Brutus,
    The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!
    Sure, the boy heard me. Brutus hath a suit
    That Caesar will not grant. O, I grow faint.
    Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord;
    Say I am merry. Come to me again,
    And bring me word what he doth say to thee.
                                               Exeunt severally.







ACT III. SCENE I.
Rome. Before the Capitol; the Senate sitting above.
A crowd of people, among them Artemidorus and the Soothsayer.

Flourish. Enter Caesar, Brutus, Cassius, Casca, Decius, Metellus,
Trebonius, Cinna, Antony, Lepidus, Popilius, Publius, and others.

  CAESAR. The ides of March are come.
  SOOTHSAYER. Ay, Caesar, but not gone.
  A Hail, Caesar! Read this schedule.
  DECIUS. Trebonius doth desire you to o'er read,
    At your best leisure, this his humble suit.
  ARTEMIDORUS. O Caesar, read mine first, for mine's a suit
    That touches Caesar nearer. Read it, great Caesar.
  CAESAR. What touches us ourself shall be last served.
  ARTEMIDORUS. Delay not, Caesar; read it instantly.
  CAESAR. What, is the fellow mad?
  PUBLIUS. Sirrah, give place.
  CASSIUS. What, urge you your petitions in the street?
    Come to the Capitol.

      Caesar goes up to the Senate House, the rest follow.

  POPILIUS. I wish your enterprise today may thrive.
  CASSIUS. What enterprise, Popilius?
  POPILIUS. Fare you well.
                                             Advances to Caesar.
  BRUTUS. What said Popilius Lena?
  CASSIUS. He wish'd today our enterprise might thrive.
    I fear our purpose is discovered.
  BRUTUS. Look, how he makes to Caesar. Mark him.
  CASSIUS. Casca,
    Be sudden, for we fear prevention.
    Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known,
    Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,
    For I will slay myself.
  BRUTUS. Cassius, be constant.
    Popilius Lena speaks not of our purposes;
    For, look, he smiles, and Caesar doth not change.
  CASSIUS. Trebonius knows his time, for, look you, Brutus,
    He draws Mark Antony out of the way.
                                    Exeunt Antony and Trebonius.
  DECIUS. Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him
    And presently prefer his suit to Caesar.
  BRUTUS. He is address'd; press near and second him.
  CINNA. Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.
  CAESAR. Are we all ready? What is now amiss
    That Caesar and his Senate must redress?
  METELLUS. Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar,
    Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat
    An humble heart.                                     Kneels.
  CAESAR. I must prevent thee, Cimber.
    These couchings and these lowly courtesies
    Might fire the blood of ordinary men
    And turn preordinance and first decree
    Into the law of children. Be not fond
    To think that Caesar bears such rebel blood
    That will be thaw'd from the true quality
    With that which melteth fools- I mean sweet words,
    Low-crooked court'sies, and base spaniel-fawning.
    Thy brother by decree is banished.
    If thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him,
    I spurn thee like a cur out of my way.
    Know, Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause
    Will he be satisfied.
  METELLUS. Is there no voice more worthy than my own,
    To sound more sweetly in great Caesar's ear
    For the repealing of my banish'd brother?
  BRUTUS. I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, Caesar,
    Desiring thee that Publius Cimber may
    Have an immediate freedom of repeal.
  CAESAR. What, Brutus?
  CASSIUS. Pardon, Caesar! Caesar, pardon!
    As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall
    To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.
  CAESAR. I could be well moved, if I were as you;
    If I could pray to move, prayers would move me;
    But I am constant as the northern star,
    Of whose true-fix'd and resting quality
    There is no fellow in the firmament.
    The skies are painted with unnumber'd sparks;
    They are all fire and every one doth shine;
    But there's but one in all doth hold his place.
    So in the world, 'tis furnish'd well with men,
    And men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive;
    Yet in the number I do know but one
    That unassailable holds on his rank,
    Unshaked of motion; and that I am he,
    Let me a little show it, even in this;
    That I was constant Cimber should be banish'd,
    And constant do remain to keep him so.
  CINNA. O Caesar-
  CAESAR. Hence! Wilt thou lift up Olympus?
  DECIUS. Great Caesar-
  CAESAR. Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?
  CASCA. Speak, hands, for me!
                        Casca first, then the other Conspirators
                                  and Marcus Brutus stab Caesar.
  CAESAR. Et tu, Brute?- Then fall, Caesar! Dies.
  CINNA. Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!
    Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.
  CASSIUS. Some to the common pulpits and cry out
    'Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!'
  BRUTUS. People and senators, be not affrighted,
    Fly not, stand still; ambition's debt is paid.
  CASCA. Go to the pulpit, Brutus.
  DECIUS. And Cassius too.
  BRUTUS. Where's Publius?
  CINNA. Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
  METELLUS. Stand fast together, lest some friend of Caesar's
    Should chance-
  BRUTUS. Talk not of standing. Publius, good cheer,
    There is no harm intended to your person,
    Nor to no Roman else. So tell them, Publius.
  CASSIUS. And leave us, Publius, lest that the people
    Rushing on us should do your age some mischief.
  BRUTUS. Do so, and let no man abide this deed
    But we the doers.

                        Re-enter Trebonius.

  CASSIUS. Where is Antony?
  TREBONIUS. Fled to his house amazed.
    Men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run
    As it were doomsday.
  BRUTUS. Fates, we will know your pleasures.
    That we shall die, we know; 'tis but the time
    And drawing days out that men stand upon.
  CASSIUS. Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life
    Cuts off so many years of fearing death.
  BRUTUS. Grant that, and then is death a benefit;
    So are we Caesar's friends that have abridged
    His time of fearing death. Stoop, Romans, stoop,
    And let us bathe our hands in Caesar's blood
    Up to the elbows, and besmear our swords;
    Then walk we forth, even to the marketplace,
    And waving our red weapons o'er our heads,
    Let's all cry, 'Peace, freedom, and liberty!'
  CASSIUS. Stoop then, and wash. How many ages hence
    Shall this our lofty scene be acted over
    In states unborn and accents yet unknown!
  BRUTUS. How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,
    That now on Pompey's basis lies along
    No worthier than the dust!
  CASSIUS. So oft as that shall be,
    So often shall the knot of us be call'd
    The men that gave their country liberty.
  DECIUS. What, shall we forth?
  CASSIUS. Ay, every man away.
    Brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels
    With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.

                        Enter a Servant.

  BRUTUS. Soft, who comes here? A friend of Antony's.
  SERVANT. Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel,
    Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down,
    And, being prostrate, thus he bade me say:
    Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest;
    Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving.
    Say I love Brutus and I honor him;
    Say I fear'd Caesar, honor'd him, and loved him.
    If Brutus will vouchsafe that Antony
    May safely come to him and be resolved
    How Caesar hath deserved to lie in death,
    Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead
    So well as Brutus living, but will follow
    The fortunes and affairs of noble Brutus
    Thorough the hazards of this untrod state
    With all true faith. So says my master Antony.
  BRUTUS. Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman;
    I never thought him worse.
    Tell him, so please him come unto this place,
    He shall be satisfied and, by my honor,
    Depart untouch'd.
  SERVANT. I'll fetch him presently.                       Exit.
  BRUTUS. I know that we shall have him well to friend.
  CASSIUS. I wish we may, but yet have I a mind
    That fears him much, and my misgiving still
    Falls shrewdly to the purpose.

                          Re-enter Antony.

  BRUTUS. But here comes Antony. Welcome, Mark Antony.
  ANTONY. O mighty Caesar! Dost thou lie so low?
    Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils,
    Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well.
    I know not, gentlemen, what you intend,
    Who else must be let blood, who else is rank.
    If I myself, there is no hour so fit
    As Caesar's death's hour, nor no instrument
    Of half that worth as those your swords, made rich
    With the most noble blood of all this world.
    I do beseech ye, if you bear me hard,
    Now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke,
    Fulfill your pleasure. Live a thousand years,
    I shall not find myself so apt to die;
    No place will please me so, no means of death,
    As here by Caesar, and by you cut off,
    The choice and master spirits of this age.
  BRUTUS. O Antony, beg not your death of us!
    Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
    As, by our hands and this our present act
    You see we do, yet see you but our hands
    And this the bleeding business they have done.
    Our hearts you see not; they are pitiful;
    And pity to the general wrong of Rome-
    As fire drives out fire, so pity pity-
    Hath done this deed on Caesar. For your part,
    To you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony;
    Our arms in strength of malice, and our hearts
    Of brothers' temper, do receive you in
    With all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.
  CASSIUS. Your voice shall be as strong as any man's
    In the disposing of new dignities.
  BRUTUS. Only be patient till we have appeased
    The multitude, beside themselves with fear,
    And then we will deliver you the cause
    Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him,
    Have thus proceeded.
  ANTONY. I doubt not of your wisdom.
    Let each man render me his bloody hand.
    First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you;
    Next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand;
    Now, Decius Brutus, yours; now yours, Metellus;
    Yours, Cinna; and, my valiant Casca, yours;
    Though last, not least in love, yours, good Trebonius.
    Gentlemen all- alas, what shall I say?
    My credit now stands on such slippery ground,
    That one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
    Either a coward or a flatterer.
    That I did love thee, Caesar, O, 'tis true!
    If then thy spirit look upon us now,
    Shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death
    To see thy Antony making his peace,
    Shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes,
    Most noble! In the presence of thy corse?
    Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds,
    Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,
    It would become me better than to close
    In terms of friendship with thine enemies.
    Pardon me, Julius! Here wast thou bay'd, brave hart,
    Here didst thou fall, and here thy hunters stand,
    Sign'd in thy spoil, and crimson'd in thy Lethe.
    O world, thou wast the forest to this hart,
    And this, indeed, O world, the heart of thee.
    How like a deer strucken by many princes
    Dost thou here lie!
  CASSIUS. Mark Antony-
  ANTONY. Pardon me, Caius Cassius.
    The enemies of Caesar shall say this:
    Then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.
  CASSIUS. I blame you not for praising Caesar so;
    But what compact mean you to have with us?
    Will you be prick'd in number of our friends,
    Or shall we on, and not depend on you?
  ANTONY. Therefore I took your hands, but was indeed
    Sway'd from the point by looking down on Caesar.
    Friends am I with you all and love you all,
    Upon this hope that you shall give me reasons
    Why and wherein Caesar was dangerous.
  BRUTUS. Or else were this a savage spectacle.
    Our reasons are so full of good regard
    That were you, Antony, the son of Caesar,
    You should be satisfied.
  ANTONY. That's all I seek;
    And am moreover suitor that I may
    Produce his body to the marketplace,
    And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,
    Speak in the order of his funeral.
  BRUTUS. You shall, Mark Antony.
  CASSIUS. Brutus, a word with you.
    [Aside to Brutus.] You know not what you do. Do not consent
    That Antony speak in his funeral.
    Know you how much the people may be moved
    By that which he will utter?
  BRUTUS. By your pardon,
    I will myself into the pulpit first,
    And show the reason of our Caesar's death.
    What Antony shall speak, I will protest
    He speaks by leave and by permission,
    And that we are contented Caesar shall
    Have all true rites and lawful ceremonies.
    It shall advantage more than do us wrong.
  CASSIUS. I know not what may fall; I like it not.
  BRUTUS. Mark Antony, here, take you Caesar's body.
    You shall not in your funeral speech blame us,
    But speak all good you can devise of Caesar,
    And say you do't by our permission,
    Else shall you not have any hand at all
    About his funeral. And you shall speak
    In the same pulpit whereto I am going,
    After my speech is ended.
  ANTONY. Be it so,
    I do desire no more.
  BRUTUS. Prepare the body then, and follow us.
                                          Exeunt all but Antony.
  ANTONY. O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,
    That I am meek and gentle with these butchers!
    Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
    That ever lived in the tide of times.
    Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood!
    Over thy wounds now do I prophesy
    (Which like dumb mouths do ope their ruby lips
    To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue)
    A curse shall light upon the limbs of men;
    Domestic fury and fierce civil strife
    Shall cumber all the parts of Italy;
    Blood and destruction shall be so in use,
    And dreadful objects so familiar,
    That mothers shall but smile when they behold
    Their infants quarter'd with the hands of war;
    All pity choked with custom of fell deeds,
    And Caesar's spirit ranging for revenge,
    With Ate by his side come hot from hell,
    Shall in these confines with a monarch's voice
    Cry 'Havoc!' and let slip the dogs of war,
    That this foul deed shall smell above the earth
    With carrion men, groaning for burial.

                        Enter a Servant.

    You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?
  SERVANT. I do, Mark Antony.
  ANTONY. Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.
  SERVANT. He did receive his letters, and is coming,
    And bid me say to you by word of mouth-
    O Caesar!                                     Sees the body.
  ANTONY. Thy heart is big; get thee apart and weep.
    Passion, I see, is catching, for mine eyes,
    Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine,
    Began to water. Is thy master coming?
  SERVANT. He lies tonight within seven leagues of Rome.
  ANTONY. Post back with speed and tell him what hath chanced.
    Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
    No Rome of safety for Octavius yet;
    Hie hence, and tell him so. Yet stay awhile,
    Thou shalt not back till I have borne this corse
    Into the marketplace. There shall I try,
    In my oration, how the people take
    The cruel issue of these bloody men,
    According to the which thou shalt discourse
    To young Octavius of the state of things.
    Lend me your hand.                Exeunt with Caesar's body.




SCENE II.
The Forum.

Enter Brutus and Cassius, and a throng of Citizens.

  CITIZENS. We will be satisfied! Let us be satisfied!
  BRUTUS. Then follow me and give me audience, friends.
    Cassius, go you into the other street
    And part the numbers.
    Those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here;
    Those that will follow Cassius, go with him;
    And public reasons shall be rendered
    Of Caesar's death.
  FIRST CITIZEN. I will hear Brutus speak.
  SECOND CITIZEN. I will hear Cassius and compare their reasons,
    When severally we hear them rendered.
                               Exit Cassius, with some Citizens.
                                    Brutus goes into the pulpit.
  THIRD CITIZEN. The noble Brutus is ascended. Silence!
  BRUTUS. Be patient till the last.
    Romans, countrymen, and lovers! Hear me for my cause, and be
    silent, that you may hear. Believe me for mine honor, and have
    respect to mine honor, that you may believe. Censure me in your
    wisdom, and awake your senses, that you may the better judge. If
    there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of Caesar's, to
    him I say that Brutus' love to Caesar was no less than his. If
    then that friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar, this is
    my answer: Not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome
    more. Had you rather Caesar were living and die all slaves, than
    that Caesar were dead to live all freemen? As Caesar loved me, I
    weep for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he was
    valiant, I honor him; but as he was ambitious, I slew him. There
    is tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor for his valor,
    and death for his ambition. Who is here so base that would be a
    bondman? If any, speak, for him have I offended. Who is here so
    rude that would not be a Roman? If any, speak, for him have I
    offended. Who is here so vile that will not love his country? If
    any, speak, for him have I offended. I pause for a reply.
  ALL. None, Brutus, none.
  BRUTUS. Then none have I offended. I have done no more to Caesar
    than you shall do to Brutus. The question of his death is
    enrolled in the Capitol, his glory not extenuated, wherein he was
    worthy, nor his offenses enforced, for which he suffered death.

              Enter Antony and others, with Caesar's body.

    Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony, who, though he had
    no hand in his death, shall receive the benefit of his dying, a
    place in the commonwealth, as which of you shall not? With this I
    depart- that, as I slew my best lover for the good of Rome, I
    have the same dagger for myself, when it shall please my country
    to need my death.
  ALL. Live, Brutus, live, live!
  FIRST CITIZEN. Bring him with triumph home unto his house.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Give him a statue with his ancestors.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Let him be Caesar.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Caesar's better parts
    Shall be crown'd in Brutus.
  FIRST CITIZEN. We'll bring him to his house with shouts and
    clamors.
  BRUTUS. My countrymen-
  SECOND CITIZEN. Peace! Silence! Brutus speaks.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Peace, ho!
  BRUTUS. Good countrymen, let me depart alone,
    And, for my sake, stay here with Antony.
    Do grace to Caesar's corse, and grace his speech
    Tending to Caesar's glories, which Mark Antony,
    By our permission, is allow'd to make.
    I do entreat you, not a man depart,
    Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.                  Exit.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Stay, ho, and let us hear Mark Antony.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Let him go up into the public chair;
    We'll hear him. Noble Antony, go up.
  ANTONY. For Brutus' sake, I am beholding to you.
                                           Goes into the pulpit.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. What does he say of Brutus?
  THIRD CITIZEN. He says, for Brutus' sake,
    He finds himself beholding to us all.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. 'Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here.
  FIRST CITIZEN. This Caesar was a tyrant.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Nay, that's certain.
    We are blest that Rome is rid of him.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Peace! Let us hear what Antony can say.
  ANTONY. You gentle Romans-
  ALL. Peace, ho! Let us hear him.
  ANTONY. Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears!
    I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
    The evil that men do lives after them,
    The good is oft interred with their bones;
    So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus
    Hath told you Caesar was ambitious;
    If it were so, it was a grievous fault,
    And grievously hath Caesar answer'd it.
    Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest-
    For Brutus is an honorable man;
    So are they all, all honorable men-
    Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral.
    He was my friend, faithful and just to me;
    But Brutus says he was ambitious,
    And Brutus is an honorable man.
    He hath brought many captives home to Rome,
    Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill.
    Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
    When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept;
    Ambition should be made of sterner stuff:
    Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
    And Brutus is an honorable man.
    You all did see that on the Lupercal
    I thrice presented him a kingly crown,
    Which he did thrice refuse. Was this ambition?
    Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
    And sure he is an honorable man.
    I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
    But here I am to speak what I do know.
    You all did love him once, not without cause;
    What cause withholds you then to mourn for him?
    O judgement, thou art fled to brutish beasts,
    And men have lost their reason. Bear with me;
    My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
    And I must pause till it come back to me.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.
  SECOND CITIZEN. If thou consider rightly of the matter,
    Caesar has had great wrong.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Has he, masters?
    I fear there will a worse come in his place.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Mark'd ye his words? He would not take the crown;
    Therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious.
  FIRST CITIZEN. If it be found so, some will dear abide it.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Poor soul, his eyes are red as fire with weeping.
  THIRD CITIZEN. There's not a nobler man in Rome than Antony.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Now mark him, he begins again to speak.
  ANTONY. But yesterday the word of Caesar might
    Have stood against the world. Now lies he there,
    And none so poor to do him reverence.
    O masters! If I were disposed to stir
    Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
    I should do Brutus wrong and Cassius wrong,
    Who, you all know, are honorable men.
    I will not do them wrong; I rather choose
    To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,
    Than I will wrong such honorable men.
    But here's a parchment with the seal of Caesar;
    I found it in his closet, 'tis his will.
    Let but the commons hear this testament-
    Which, pardon me, I do not mean to read-
    And they would go and kiss dead Caesar's wounds
    And dip their napkins in his sacred blood,
    Yea, beg a hair of him for memory,
    And, dying, mention it within their wills,
    Bequeathing it as a rich legacy
    Unto their issue.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. We'll hear the will. Read it, Mark Antony.
  ALL. The will, the will! We will hear Caesar's will.
  ANTONY. Have patience, gentle friends, I must not read it;
    It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you.
    You are not wood, you are not stones, but men;
    And, being men, hearing the will of Caesar,
    It will inflame you, it will make you mad.
    'Tis good you know not that you are his heirs,
    For if you should, O, what would come of it!
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Read the will; we'll hear it, Antony.
    You shall read us the will, Caesar's will.
  ANTONY. Will you be patient? Will you stay awhile?
    I have o'ershot myself to tell you of it.
    I fear I wrong the honorable men
    Whose daggers have stabb'd Caesar; I do fear it.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. They were traitors. Honorable men!
  ALL. The will! The testament!
  SECOND CITIZEN. They were villains, murtherers. The will!
    Read the will!
  ANTONY. You will compel me then to read the will?
    Then make a ring about the corse of Caesar,
    And let me show you him that made the will.
    Shall I descend? And will you give me leave?
  ALL. Come down.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Descend.
                                  He comes down from the pulpit.
  THIRD CITIZEN. You shall have leave.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. A ring, stand round.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Stand from the hearse, stand from the body.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Room for Antony, most noble Antony.
  ANTONY. Nay, press not so upon me, stand far off.
  ALL. Stand back; room, bear back!
  ANTONY. If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
    You all do know this mantle. I remember
    The first time ever Caesar put it on;
    'Twas on a summer's evening, in his tent,
    That day he overcame the Nervii.
    Look, in this place ran Cassius' dagger through;
    See what a rent the envious Casca made;
    Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb'd;
    And as he pluck'd his cursed steel away,
    Mark how the blood of Caesar follow'd it,
    As rushing out of doors, to be resolved
    If Brutus so unkindly knock'd, or no;
    For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar's angel.
    Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him!
    This was the most unkindest cut of all;
    For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,
    Ingratitude, more strong than traitors' arms,
    Quite vanquish'd him. Then burst his mighty heart,
    And, in his mantle muffling up his face,
    Even at the base of Pompey's statue,
    Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell.
    O, what a fall was there, my countrymen!
    Then I, and you, and all of us fell down,
    Whilst bloody treason flourish'd over us.
    O, now you weep, and I perceive you feel
    The dint of pity. These are gracious drops.
    Kind souls, what weep you when you but behold
    Our Caesar's vesture wounded? Look you here,
    Here is himself, marr'd, as you see, with traitors.
  FIRST CITIZEN. O piteous spectacle!
  SECOND CITIZEN. O noble Caesar!
  THIRD CITIZEN. O woeful day!
  FOURTH CITIZEN. O traitors villains!
  FIRST CITIZEN. O most bloody sight!
  SECOND CITIZEN. We will be revenged.
  ALL. Revenge! About! Seek! Burn! Fire! Kill!
    Slay! Let not a traitor live!
  ANTONY. Stay, countrymen.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Peace there! Hear the noble Antony.
  SECOND CITIZEN. We'll hear him, we'll follow him, we'll die with
    him.
  ANTONY. Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up
    To such a sudden flood of mutiny.
    They that have done this deed are honorable.
    What private griefs they have, alas, I know not,
    That made them do it. They are wise and honorable,
    And will, no doubt, with reasons answer you.
    I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts.
    I am no orator, as Brutus is;
    But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man,
    That love my friend, and that they know full well
    That gave me public leave to speak of him.
    For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,
    Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech,
    To stir men's blood. I only speak right on;
    I tell you that which you yourselves do know;
    Show you sweet Caesar's wounds, poor dumb mouths,
    And bid them speak for me. But were I Brutus,
    And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
    Would ruffle up your spirits and put a tongue
    In every wound of Caesar that should move
    The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.
  ALL. We'll mutiny.
  FIRST CITIZEN. We'll burn the house of Brutus.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Away, then! Come, seek the conspirators.
  ANTONY. Yet hear me, countrymen; yet hear me speak.
  ALL. Peace, ho! Hear Antony, most noble Antony!
  ANTONY. Why, friends, you go to do you know not what.
    Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves?
    Alas, you know not; I must tell you then.
    You have forgot the will I told you of.
  ALL. Most true, the will! Let's stay and hear the will.
  ANTONY. Here is the will, and under Caesar's seal.
    To every Roman citizen he gives,
    To every several man, seventy-five drachmas.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Most noble Caesar! We'll revenge his death.
  THIRD CITIZEN. O royal Caesar!
  ANTONY. Hear me with patience.
  ALL. Peace, ho!
  ANTONY. Moreover, he hath left you all his walks,
    His private arbors, and new-planted orchards,
    On this side Tiber; he hath left them you,
    And to your heirs forever- common pleasures,
    To walk abroad and recreate yourselves.
    Here was a Caesar! When comes such another?
  FIRST CITIZEN. Never, never. Come, away, away!
    We'll burn his body in the holy place
    And with the brands fire the traitors' houses.
    Take up the body.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Go fetch fire.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Pluck down benches.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Pluck down forms, windows, anything.
                                  Exeunt Citizens with the body.
  ANTONY. Now let it work. Mischief, thou art afoot,
    Take thou what course thou wilt.

                        Enter a Servant.

    How now, fellow?
  SERVANT. Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.
  ANTONY. Where is he?
  SERVANT. He and Lepidus are at Caesar's house.
  ANTONY. And thither will I straight to visit him.
    He comes upon a wish. Fortune is merry,
    And in this mood will give us anything.
  SERVANT. I heard him say Brutus and Cassius
    Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.
  ANTONY. Be like they had some notice of the people,
    How I had moved them. Bring me to Octavius.          Exeunt.




SCENE III.
A street.

Enter Cinna the poet.

  CINNA. I dreamt tonight that I did feast with Caesar,
    And things unluckily charge my fantasy.
    I have no will to wander forth of doors,
    Yet something leads me forth.

                        Enter Citizens.

  FIRST CITIZEN. What is your name?
  SECOND CITIZEN. Whither are you going?
  THIRD CITIZEN. Where do you dwell?
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Are you a married man or a bachelor?
  SECOND CITIZEN. Answer every man directly.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Ay, and briefly.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Ay, and wisely.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Ay, and truly, you were best.
  CINNA. What is my name? Whither am I going? Where do I dwell? Am I
    a married man or a bachelor? Then, to answer every man directly
    and briefly, wisely and truly: wisely I say, I am a bachelor.
  SECOND CITIZEN. That's as much as to say they are fools that marry.
    You'll bear me a bang for that, I fear. Proceed directly.
  CINNA. Directly, I am going to Caesar's funeral.
  FIRST CITIZEN. As a friend or an enemy?
  CINNA. As a friend.
  SECOND CITIZEN. That matter is answered directly.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. For your dwelling, briefly.
  CINNA. Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Your name, sir, truly.
  CINNA. Truly, my name is Cinna.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Tear him to pieces, he's a conspirator.
  CINNA. I am Cinna the poet, I am Cinna the poet.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his bad
    verses.
  CINNA. I am not Cinna the conspirator.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. It is no matter, his name's Cinna. Pluck but his
    name out of his heart, and turn him going.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Tear him, tear him! Come, brands, ho, firebrands. To
    Brutus', to Cassius'; burn all. Some to Decius' house, and some
    to Casca's, some to Ligarius'. Away, go!             Exeunt.




ACT IV. SCENE I.
A house in Rome. Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus, seated at a
table.

  ANTONY. These many then shall die, their names are prick'd.
  OCTAVIUS. Your brother too must die; consent you, Lepidus?
  LEPIDUS. I do consent-
  OCTAVIUS. Prick him down, Antony.
  LEPIDUS. Upon condition Publius shall not live,
    Who is your sister's son, Mark Antony.
  ANTONY. He shall not live; look, with a spot I damn him.
    But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar's house,
    Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
    How to cut off some charge in legacies.
  LEPIDUS. What, shall I find you here?
  OCTAVIUS. Or here, or at the Capitol.            Exit Lepidus.
  ANTONY. This is a slight unmeritable man,
    Meet to be sent on errands. Is it fit,
    The three-fold world divided, he should stand
    One of the three to share it?
  OCTAVIUS. So you thought him,
    And took his voice who should be prick'd to die
    In our black sentence and proscription.
  ANTONY. Octavius, I have seen more days than you,
    And though we lay these honors on this man
    To ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads,
    He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold,
    To groan and sweat under the business,
    Either led or driven, as we point the way;
    And having brought our treasure where we will,
    Then take we down his load and turn him off,
    Like to the empty ass, to shake his ears
    And graze in commons.
  OCTAVIUS. You may do your will,
    But he's a tried and valiant soldier.
  ANTONY. So is my horse, Octavius, and for that
    I do appoint him store of provender.
    It is a creature that I teach to fight,
    To wind, to stop, to run directly on,
    His corporal motion govern'd by my spirit.
    And, in some taste, is Lepidus but so:
    He must be taught, and train'd, and bid go forth;
    A barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds
    On objects, arts, and imitations,
    Which, out of use and staled by other men,
    Begin his fashion. Do not talk of him
    But as a property. And now, Octavius,
    Listen great things. Brutus and Cassius
    Are levying powers; we must straight make head;
    Therefore let our alliance be combined,
    Our best friends made, our means stretch'd;
    And let us presently go sit in council,
    How covert matters may be best disclosed,
    And open perils surest answered.
  OCTAVIUS. Let us do so, for we are at the stake,
    And bay'd about with many enemies;
    And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear,
    Millions of mischiefs.                               Exeunt.




SCENE II.
Camp near Sardis. Before Brutus' tent. Drum.

Enter Brutus, Lucilius, Lucius, and Soldiers; Titinius and
Pindarus meet them.

  BRUTUS. Stand, ho!
  LUCILIUS. Give the word, ho, and stand.
  BRUTUS. What now, Lucilius, is Cassius near?
  LUCILIUS. He is at hand, and Pindarus is come
    To do you salutation from his master.
  BRUTUS. He greets me well. Your master, Pindarus,
    In his own change, or by ill officers,
    Hath given me some worthy cause to wish
    Things done undone; but if he be at hand,
    I shall be satisfied.
  PINDARUS. I do not doubt
    But that my noble master will appear
    Such as he is, full of regard and honor.
  BRUTUS. He is not doubted. A word, Lucilius,
    How he received you. Let me be resolved.
  LUCILIUS. With courtesy and with respect enough,
    But not with such familiar instances,
    Nor with such free and friendly conference,
    As he hath used of old.
  BRUTUS. Thou hast described
    A hot friend cooling. Ever note, Lucilius,
    When love begins to sicken and decay
    It useth an enforced ceremony.
    There are no tricks in plain and simple faith;
    But hollow men, like horses hot at hand,
    Make gallant show and promise of their mettle;
    But when they should endure the bloody spur,
    They fall their crests and like deceitful jades
    Sink in the trial. Comes his army on?
  LUCILIUS. They meant his night in Sard is to be quarter'd;
    The greater part, the horse in general,
    Are come with Cassius.                     Low march within.
  BRUTUS. Hark, he is arrived.
    March gently on to meet him.

                  Enter Cassius and his Powers.

  CASSIUS. Stand, ho!
  BRUTUS. Stand, ho! Speak the word along.
  FIRST SOLDIER. Stand!
  SECOND SOLDIER. Stand!
  THIRD SOLDIER. Stand!
  CASSIUS. Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.
  BRUTUS. Judge me, you gods! Wrong I mine enemies?
    And, if not so, how should I wrong a brother?
  CASSIUS. Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs,
    And when you do them-
  BRUTUS. Cassius, be content,
    Speak your griefs softly, I do know you well.
    Before the eyes of both our armies here,
    Which should perceive nothing but love from us,
    Let us not wrangle. Bid them move away;
    Then in my tent, Cassius, enlarge your griefs,
    And I will give you audience.
  CASSIUS. Pindarus,
    Bid our commanders lead their charges off
    A little from this ground.
  BRUTUS. Lucilius, do you the like, and let no man
    Come to our tent till we have done our conference.
    Let Lucius and Titinius guard our door.             Exeunt.




SCENE III.
Brutus' tent.

Enter Brutus and Cassius.

  CASSIUS. That you have wrong'd me doth appear in this:
    You have condemn'd and noted Lucius Pella
    For taking bribes here of the Sardians,
    Wherein my letters, praying on his side,
    Because I knew the man, were slighted off.
  BRUTUS. You wrong'd yourself to write in such a case.
  CASSIUS. In such a time as this it is not meet
    That every nice offense should bear his comment.
  BRUTUS. Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself
    Are much condemn'd to have an itching palm,
    To sell and mart your offices for gold
    To undeservers.
  CASSIUS. I an itching palm?
    You know that you are Brutus that speaks this,
    Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
  BRUTUS. The name of Cassius honors this corruption,
    And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.
  CASSIUS. Chastisement?
  BRUTUS. Remember March, the ides of March remember.
    Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake?
    What villain touch'd his body, that did stab,
    And not for justice? What, shall one of us,
    That struck the foremost man of all this world
    But for supporting robbers, shall we now
    Contaminate our fingers with base bribes
    And sell the mighty space of our large honors
    For so much trash as may be grasped thus?
    I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,
    Than such a Roman.
  CASSIUS. Brutus, bait not me,
    I'll not endure it. You forget yourself
    To hedge me in. I am a soldier, I,
    Older in practice, abler than yourself
    To make conditions.
  BRUTUS. Go to, you are not, Cassius.
  CASSIUS. I am.
  BRUTUS. I say you are not.
  CASSIUS. Urge me no more, I shall forget myself;
    Have mind upon your health, tempt me no farther.
  BRUTUS. Away, slight man!
  CASSIUS. Is't possible?
  BRUTUS. Hear me, for I will speak.
    Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
    Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?
  CASSIUS. O gods, ye gods! Must I endure all this?
  BRUTUS. All this? Ay, more. Fret till your proud heart break.
    Go show your slaves how choleric you are,
    And make your bondmen tremble. Must I bouge?
    Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch
    Under your testy humor? By the gods,
    You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
    Though it do split you, for, from this day forth,
    I'll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,
    When you are waspish.
  CASSIUS. Is it come to this?
  BRUTUS. You say you are a better soldier:
    Let it appear so, make your vaunting true,
    And it shall please me well. For mine own part,
    I shall be glad to learn of noble men.
  CASSIUS. You wrong me every way, you wrong me, Brutus.
    I said, an elder soldier, not a better.
    Did I say 'better'?
  BRUTUS. If you did, I care not.
  CASSIUS. When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.
  BRUTUS. Peace, peace! You durst not so have tempted him.
  CASSIUS. I durst not?
  BRUTUS. No.
  CASSIUS. What, durst not tempt him?
  BRUTUS. For your life you durst not.
  CASSIUS. Do not presume too much upon my love;
    I may do that I shall be sorry for.
  BRUTUS. You have done that you should be sorry for.
    There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats,
    For I am arm'd so strong in honesty,
    That they pass by me as the idle wind
    Which I respect not. I did send to you
    For certain sums of gold, which you denied me,
    For I can raise no money by vile means.
    By heaven, I had rather coin my heart
    And drop my blood for drachmas than to wring
    From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash
    By any indirection. I did send
    To you for gold to pay my legions,
    Which you denied me. Was that done like Cassius?
    Should I have answer'd Caius Cassius so?
    When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous
    To lock such rascal counters from his friends,
    Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts,
    Dash him to pieces!
  CASSIUS. I denied you not.
  BRUTUS. You did.
  CASSIUS. I did not. He was but a fool
    That brought my answer back. Brutus hath rived my heart.
    A friend should bear his friend's infirmities,
    But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.
  BRUTUS. I do not, till you practise them on me.
  CASSIUS. You love me not.
  BRUTUS. I do not like your faults.
  CASSIUS. A friendly eye could never see such faults.
  BRUTUS. A flatterer's would not, though they do appear
    As huge as high Olympus.
  CASSIUS. Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come,
    Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
    For Cassius is aweary of the world:
    Hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;
    Check'd like a bondman; all his faults observed,
    Set in a notebook, learn'd and conn'd by rote,
    To cast into my teeth. O, I could weep
    My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,
    And here my naked breast; within, a heart
    Dearer than Pluto's mine, richer than gold.
    If that thou best a Roman, take it forth;
    I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart.
    Strike, as thou didst at Caesar, for I know,
    When thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him better
    Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.
  BRUTUS. Sheathe your dagger.
    Be angry when you will, it shall have scope;
    Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
    O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb,
    That carries anger as the flint bears fire,
    Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark
    And straight is cold again.
  CASSIUS. Hath Cassius lived
    To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,
    When grief and blood ill-temper'd vexeth him?
  BRUTUS. When I spoke that, I was ill-temper'd too.
  CASSIUS. Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.
  BRUTUS. And my heart too.
  CASSIUS. O Brutus!
  BRUTUS. What's the matter?
  CASSIUS. Have not you love enough to bear with me
    When that rash humor which my mother gave me
    Makes me forgetful?
  BRUTUS. Yes, Cassius, and from henceforth,
    When you are overearnest with your Brutus,
    He'll think your mother chides, and leave you so.
  POET. [Within.] Let me go in to see the generals.
    There is some grudge between 'em, 'tis not meet
    They be alone.
  LUCILIUS. [Within.] You shall not come to them.
  POET. [Within.] Nothing but death shall stay me.

      Enter Poet, followed by Lucilius, Titinius, and Lucius.

  CASSIUS. How now, what's the matter?
  POET. For shame, you generals! What do you mean?
    Love, and be friends, as two such men should be;
    For I have seen more years, I'm sure, than ye.
  CASSIUS. Ha, ha! How vilely doth this cynic rhyme!
  BRUTUS. Get you hence, sirrah; saucy fellow, hence!
  CASSIUS. Bear with him, Brutus; 'tis his fashion.
  BRUTUS. I'll know his humor when he knows his time.
    What should the wars do with these jigging fools?
    Companion, hence!
  CASSIUS. Away, away, be gone!                       Exit Poet.
  BRUTUS. Lucilius and Titinius, bid the commanders
    Prepare to lodge their companies tonight.
  CASSIUS. And come yourselves and bring Messala with you
    Immediately to us.             Exeunt Lucilius and Titinius.
  BRUTUS. Lucius, a bowl of wine!                   Exit Lucius.
  CASSIUS. I did not think you could have been so angry.
  BRUTUS. O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.
  CASSIUS. Of your philosophy you make no use,
    If you give place to accidental evils.
  BRUTUS. No man bears sorrow better. Portia is dead.
  CASSIUS. Ha? Portia?
  BRUTUS. She is dead.
  CASSIUS. How 'scaped killing when I cross'd you so?
    O insupportable and touching loss!
    Upon what sickness?
  BRUTUS. Impatient of my absence,
    And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony
    Have made themselves so strong- for with her death
    That tidings came- with this she fell distract,
    And (her attendants absent) swallow'd fire.
  CASSIUS. And died so?
  BRUTUS. Even so.
  CASSIUS. O ye immortal gods!

               Re-enter Lucius, with wine and taper.

  BRUTUS. Speak no more of her. Give me a bowl of wine.
    In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius.              Drinks.
  CASSIUS. My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.
  Fill, Lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup;
  I cannot drink too much of Brutus' love.               Drinks.
  BRUTUS. Come in, Titinius!                        Exit Lucius.

                 Re-enter Titinius, with Messala.

    Welcome, good Messala.
    Now sit we close about this taper here,
    And call in question our necessities.
  CASSIUS. Portia, art thou gone?
  BRUTUS. No more, I pray you.
    Messala, I have here received letters
    That young Octavius and Mark Antony
    Come down upon us with a mighty power,
    Bending their expedition toward Philippi.
  MESSALA. Myself have letters of the selfsame tenure.
  BRUTUS. With what addition?
  MESSALA. That by proscription and bills of outlawry
    Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus
    Have put to death an hundred senators.
  BRUTUS. There in our letters do not well agree;
    Mine speak of seventy senators that died
    By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.
  CASSIUS. Cicero one!
  MESSALA. Cicero is dead,
    And by that order of proscription.
    Had you your letters from your wife, my lord?
  BRUTUS. No, Messala.
  MESSALA. Nor nothing in your letters writ of her?
  BRUTUS. Nothing, Messala.
  MESSALA. That, methinks, is strange.
  BRUTUS. Why ask you? Hear you aught of her in yours?
  MESSALA. No, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Now, as you are a Roman, tell me true.
  MESSALA. Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell:
    For certain she is dead, and by strange manner.
  BRUTUS. Why, farewell, Portia. We must die, Messala.
    With meditating that she must die once
    I have the patience to endure it now.
  MESSALA. Even so great men great losses should endure.
  CASSIUS. I have as much of this in art as you,
    But yet my nature could not bear it so.
  BRUTUS. Well, to our work alive. What do you think
    Of marching to Philippi presently?
  CASSIUS. I do not think it good.
  BRUTUS. Your reason?
  CASSIUS. This it is:
    'Tis better that the enemy seek us;
    So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,
    Doing himself offense, whilst we lying still
    Are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness.
  BRUTUS. Good reasons must of force give place to better.
    The people 'twixt Philippi and this ground
    Do stand but in a forced affection,
    For they have grudged us contribution.
    The enemy, marching along by them,
    By them shall make a fuller number up,
    Come on refresh'd, new-added, and encouraged;
    From which advantage shall we cut him off
    If at Philippi we do face him there,
    These people at our back.
  CASSIUS. Hear me, good brother.
  BRUTUS. Under your pardon. You must note beside
    That we have tried the utmost of our friends,
    Our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe:
    The enemy increaseth every day;
    We, at the height, are ready to decline.
    There is a tide in the affairs of men
    Which taken at the flood leads on to fortune;
    Omitted, all the voyage of their life
    Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
    On such a full sea are we now afloat,
    And we must take the current when it serves,
    Or lose our ventures.
  CASSIUS. Then, with your will, go on;
    We'll along ourselves and meet them at Philippi.
  BRUTUS. The deep of night is crept upon our talk,
    And nature must obey necessity,
    Which we will niggard with a little rest.
    There is no more to say?
  CASSIUS. No more. Good night.
    Early tomorrow will we rise and hence.
  BRUTUS. Lucius!

                       Re-enter Lucius.

    My gown.                                        Exit Lucius.
    Farewell, good Messala;
    Good night, Titinius; noble, noble Cassius,
    Good night and good repose.
  CASSIUS. O my dear brother!
    This was an ill beginning of the night.
    Never come such division 'tween our souls!
    Let it not, Brutus.
  BRUTUS. Everything is well.
  CASSIUS. Good night, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Good night, good brother.
  TITINIUS. MESSALA. Good night, Lord Brutus.
  BRUTUS. Farewell, everyone.
                                          Exeunt all but Brutus.

               Re-enter Lucius, with the gown.

    Give me the gown. Where is thy instrument?
  LUCIUS. Here in the tent.
  BRUTUS. What, thou speak'st drowsily?
    Poor knave, I blame thee not, thou art o'erwatch'd.
    Call Claudio and some other of my men,
    I'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.
  LUCIUS. Varro and Claudio!

                   Enter Varro and Claudio.

  VARRO. Calls my lord?
  BRUTUS. I pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep;
    It may be I shall raise you by and by
    On business to my brother Cassius.
  VARRO. So please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure.
  BRUTUS. I would not have it so. Lie down, good sirs.
    It may be I shall otherwise bethink me.
    Look Lucius, here's the book I sought for so;
    I put it in the pocket of my gown.
                                     Varro and Claudio lie down.
  LUCIUS. I was sure your lordship did not give it me.
  BRUTUS. Bear with me, good boy, I am much forgetful.
    Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile,
    And touch thy instrument a strain or two?
  LUCIUS. Ay, my lord, an't please you.
  BRUTUS. It does, my boy.
    I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.
  LUCIUS. It is my duty, sir.
  BRUTUS. I should not urge thy duty past thy might;
    I know young bloods look for a time of rest.
  LUCIUS. I have slept, my lord, already.
  BRUTUS. It was well done, and thou shalt sleep again;
    I will not hold thee long. If I do live,
    I will be good to thee.                   Music, and a song.
    This is a sleepy tune. O murtherous slumber,
    Layest thou thy leaden mace upon my boy
    That plays thee music? Gentle knave, good night.
    I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee.
    If thou dost nod, thou break'st thy instrument;
    I'll take it from thee; and, good boy, good night.
    Let me see, let me see; is not the leaf turn'd down
    Where I left reading? Here it is, I think.        Sits down.

                 Enter the Ghost of Caesar.

    How ill this taper burns! Ha, who comes here?
    I think it is the weakness of mine eyes
    That shapes this monstrous apparition.
    It comes upon me. Art thou anything?
    Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil
    That makest my blood cold and my hair to stare?
    Speak to me what thou art.
  GHOST. Thy evil spirit, Brutus.
  BRUTUS. Why comest thou?
  GHOST. To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.
  BRUTUS. Well, then I shall see thee again?
  GHOST. Ay, at Philippi.
  BRUTUS. Why, I will see thee at Philippi then.     Exit Ghost.
    Now I have taken heart thou vanishest.
    Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.
    Boy! Lucius! Varro! Claudio! Sirs, awake!
    Claudio!
  LUCIUS. The strings, my lord, are false.
  BRUTUS. He thinks he still is at his instrument.
    Lucius, awake!
  LUCIUS. My lord?
  BRUTUS. Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out?
  LUCIUS. My lord, I do not know that I did cry.
  BRUTUS. Yes, that thou didst. Didst thou see anything?
  LUCIUS. Nothing, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Sleep again, Lucius. Sirrah Claudio!
    [To Varro.] Fellow thou, awake!
  VARRO. My lord?
  CLAUDIO. My lord?
  BRUTUS. Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?
  VARRO. CLAUDIO. Did we, my lord?
  BRUTUS. Ay, saw you anything?
  VARRO. No, my lord, I saw nothing.
  CLAUDIO. Nor I, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Go and commend me to my brother Cassius;
    Bid him set on his powers betimes before,
    And we will follow.
  VARRO. CLAUDIO. It shall be done, my lord.             Exeunt.

ACT V. SCENE I.
The plains of Philippi.

Enter Octavius, Antony, and their Army.

  OCTAVIUS. Now, Antony, our hopes are answered.
    You said the enemy would not come down,
    But keep the hills and upper regions.
    It proves not so. Their battles are at hand;
    They mean to warn us at Philippi here,
    Answering before we do demand of them.
  ANTONY. Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know
    Wherefore they do it. They could be content
    To visit other places, and come down
    With fearful bravery, thinking by this face
    To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage;
    But 'tis not so.

                    Enter a Messenger.

  MESSENGER. Prepare you, generals.
    The enemy comes on in gallant show;
    Their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
    And something to be done immediately.
  ANTONY. Octavius, lead your battle softly on,
    Upon the left hand of the even field.
  OCTAVIUS. Upon the right hand I, keep thou the left.
  ANTONY. Why do you cross me in this exigent?
  OCTAVIUS. I do not cross you, but I will do so.

      March. Drum. Enter Brutus, Cassius, and their Army;
           Lucilius, Titinius, Messala, and others.

  BRUTUS. They stand, and would have parley.
  CASSIUS. Stand fast, Titinius; we must out and talk.
  OCTAVIUS. Mark Antony, shall we give sign of battle?
  ANTONY. No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge.
    Make forth, the generals would have some words.
  OCTAVIUS. Stir not until the signal not until the signal.
  BRUTUS. Words before blows. Is it so, countrymen?
  OCTAVIUS. Not that we love words better, as you do.
  BRUTUS. Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius.
  ANTONY. In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words.
    Witness the hole you made in Caesar's heart,
    Crying 'Long live! Hail, Caesar!'
  CASSIUS. Antony,
    The posture of your blows are yet unknown;
    But for your words, they rob the Hybla bees,
    And leave them honeyless.
  ANTONY. Not stingless too.
  BRUTUS. O, yes, and soundless too,
    For you have stol'n their buzzing, Antony,
    And very wisely threat before you sting.
  ANTONY. Villains! You did not so when your vile daggers
    Hack'd one another in the sides of Caesar.
    You show'd your teeth like apes, and fawn'd like hounds,
    And bow'd like bondmen, kissing Caesar's feet;
    Whilst damned Casca, like a cur, behind
    Strooke Caesar on the neck. O you flatterers!
  CASSIUS. Flatterers? Now, Brutus, thank yourself.
    This tongue had not offended so today,
    If Cassius might have ruled.
  OCTAVIUS. Come, come, the cause. If arguing make us sweat,
    The proof of it will turn to redder drops.
    Look,
    I draw a sword against conspirators;
    When think you that the sword goes up again?
    Never, till Caesar's three and thirty wounds
    Be well avenged, or till another Caesar
    Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.
  BRUTUS. Caesar, thou canst not die by traitors' hands,
    Unless thou bring'st them with thee.
  OCTAVIUS. So I hope,
    I was not born to die on Brutus' sword.
  BRUTUS. O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,
    Young man, thou couldst not die more honorable.
  CASSIUS. A peevish school boy, worthless of such honor,
    Join'd with a masker and a reveler!
  ANTONY. Old Cassius still!
  OCTAVIUS. Come, Antony, away!
    Defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth.
    If you dare fight today, come to the field;
    If not, when you have stomachs.
                        Exeunt Octavius, Antony, and their Army.
  CASSIUS. Why, now, blow and, swell billow, and swim bark!
    The storm is up, and all is on the hazard.
  BRUTUS. Ho, Lucilius! Hark, a word with you.
  LUCILIUS. [Stands forth.] My lord?
                             Brutus and Lucilius converse apart.
  CASSIUS. Messala!
  MESSALA. [Stands forth.] What says my general?
  CASSIUS. Messala,
    This is my birthday, as this very day
    Was Cassius born. Give me thy hand, Messala.
    Be thou my witness that, against my will,
    As Pompey was, am I compell'd to set
    Upon one battle all our liberties.
    You know that I held Epicurus strong,
    And his opinion. Now I change my mind,
    And partly credit things that do presage.
    Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign
    Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perch'd,
    Gorging and feeding from our soldiers' hands,
    Who to Philippi here consorted us.
    This morning are they fled away and gone,
    And in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites
    Fly o'er our heads and downward look on us,
    As we were sickly prey. Their shadows seem
    A canopy most fatal, under which
    Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.
  MESSALA. Believe not so.
  CASSIUS. I but believe it partly,
    For I am fresh of spirit and resolved
    To meet all perils very constantly.
  BRUTUS. Even so, Lucilius.
  CASSIUS. Now, most noble Brutus,
    The gods today stand friendly that we may,
    Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age!
    But, since the affairs of men rest still incertain,
    Let's reason with the worst that may befall.
    If we do lose this battle, then is this
    The very last time we shall speak together.
    What are you then determined to do?
  BRUTUS. Even by the rule of that philosophy
    By which I did blame Cato for the death
    Which he did give himself- I know not how,
    But I do find it cowardly and vile,
    For fear of what might fall, so to prevent
    The time of life- arming myself with patience
    To stay the providence of some high powers
    That govern us below.
  CASSIUS. Then, if we lose this battle,
    You are contented to be led in triumph
    Thorough the streets of Rome?
  BRUTUS. No, Cassius, no. Think not, thou noble Roman,
    That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome;
    He bears too great a mind. But this same day
    Must end that work the ides of March begun.
    And whether we shall meet again I know not.
    Therefore our everlasting farewell take.
    Forever, and forever, farewell, Cassius!
    If we do meet again, why, we shall smile;
    If not, why then this parting was well made.
  CASSIUS. Forever and forever farewell, Brutus!
    If we do meet again, we'll smile indeed;
    If not, 'tis true this parting was well made.
  BRUTUS. Why then, lead on. O, that a man might know
    The end of this day's business ere it come!
    But it sufficeth that the day will end,
    And then the end is known. Come, ho! Away!           Exeunt.




SCENE II.
The field of battle.

Alarum. Enter Brutus and Messala.

  BRUTUS. Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills
    Unto the legions on the other side.             Loud alarum.
    Let them set on at once, for I perceive
    But cold demeanor in Octavia's wing,
    And sudden push gives them the overthrow.
    Ride, ride, Messala. Let them all come down.         Exeunt.




SCENE III.
Another part of the field.

Alarums. Enter Cassius and Titinius.

  CASSIUS. O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly!
    Myself have to mine own turn'd enemy.
    This ensign here of mine was turning back;
    I slew the coward, and did take it from him.
  TITINIUS. O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early,
    Who, having some advantage on Octavius,
    Took it too eagerly. His soldiers fell to spoil,
    Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.

                       Enter Pindarus.

  PINDARUS. Fly further off, my lord, fly further off;
    Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord;
    Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.
  CASSIUS. This hill is far enough. Look, look, Titinius:
    Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?
  TITINIUS. They are, my lord.
  CASSIUS. Titinius, if thou lovest me,
    Mount thou my horse and hide thy spurs in him,
    Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops
    And here again, that I may rest assured
    Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.
  TITINIUS. I will be here again, even with a thought.     Exit.
  CASSIUS. Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill;
    My sight was ever thick; regard Titinius,
    And tell me what thou notest about the field.
                                      Pindarus ascends the hill.
    This day I breathed first: time is come round,
    And where I did begin, there shall I end;
    My life is run his compass. Sirrah, what news?
  PINDARUS. [Above.] O my lord!
  CASSIUS. What news?
  PINDARUS. [Above.] Titinius is enclosed round about
    With horsemen, that make to him on the spur;
    Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him.
    Now, Titinius! Now some light. O, he lights too.
    He's ta'en [Shout.] And, hark! They shout for joy.
  CASSIUS. Come down; behold no more.
    O, coward that I am, to live so long,
    To see my best friend ta'en before my face!
                                              Pindarus descends.
    Come hither, sirrah.
    In Parthia did I take thee prisoner,
    And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
    That whatsoever I did bid thee do,
    Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine oath;
    Now be a freeman, and with this good sword,
    That ran through Caesar's bowels, search this bosom.
    Stand not to answer: here, take thou the hilts;
    And when my face is cover'd, as 'tis now,
    Guide thou the sword. [Pindarus stabs him.] Caesar, thou art revenged,
    Even with the sword that kill'd thee.                  Dies.
  PINDARUS. So, I am free, yet would not so have been,
    Durst I have done my will. O Cassius!
    Far from this country Pindarus shall run,
    Where never Roman shall take note of him.              Exit.

                Re-enter Titinius with Messala.

  MESSALA. It is but change, Titinius, for Octavius
    Is overthrown by noble Brutus' power,
    As Cassius' legions are by Antony.
  TITINIUS. These tidings would well comfort Cassius.
  MESSALA. Where did you leave him?
  TITINIUS. All disconsolate,
    With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill.
  MESSALA. Is not that he that lies upon the ground?
  TITINIUS. He lies not like the living. O my heart!
  MESSALA. Is not that he?
  TITINIUS. No, this was he, Messala,
    But Cassius is no more. O setting sun,
    As in thy red rays thou dost sink to night,
    So in his red blood Cassius' day is set,
    The sun of Rome is set! Our day is gone;
    Clouds, dews, and dangers come; our deeds are done!
    Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.
  MESSALA. Mistrust of good success hath done this deed.
    O hateful error, melancholy's child,
    Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
    The things that are not? O error, soon conceived,
    Thou never comest unto a happy birth,
    But kill'st the mother that engender'd thee!
  TITINIUS. What, Pindarus! Where art thou, Pindarus?
  MESSALA. Seek him, Titinius, whilst I go to meet
    The noble Brutus, thrusting this report
    Into his ears. I may say 'thrusting' it,
    For piercing steel and darts envenomed
    Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus
    As tidings of this sight.
  TITINIUS. Hie you, Messala,
    And I will seek for Pindarus the while.        Exit Messala.
    Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius?
    Did I not meet thy friends? And did not they
    Put on my brows this wreath of victory,
    And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their shouts?
    Alas, thou hast misconstrued everything!
    But, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow;
    Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I
    Will do his bidding. Brutus, come apace,
    And see how I regarded Caius Cassius.
    By your leave, gods, this is a Roman's part.
    Come, Cassius' sword, and find Titinius' heart.
                                                  Kills himself.

       Alarum. Re-enter Messala, with Brutus, young Cato,
                         and others.

  BRUTUS. Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?
  MESSALA. Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.
  BRUTUS. Titinius' face is upward.
  CATO. He is slain.
  BRUTUS. O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet!
    Thy spirit walks abroad, and turns our swords
    In our own proper entrails.                     Low alarums.
  CATO. Brave Titinius!
    Look whe'er he have not crown'd dead Cassius!
  BRUTUS. Are yet two Romans living such as these?
    The last of all the Romans, fare thee well!
    It is impossible that ever Rome
    Should breed thy fellow. Friends, I owe moe tears
    To this dead man than you shall see me pay.
    I shall find time, Cassius, I shall find time.
    Come therefore, and to Thasos send his body;
    His funerals shall not be in our camp,
    Lest it discomfort us. Lucilius, come,
    And come, young Cato; let us to the field.
    Labio and Flavio, set our battles on.
    'Tis three o'clock, and Romans, yet ere night
    We shall try fortune in a second fight.              Exeunt.




SCENE IV.
Another part of the field.

Alarum. Enter, fighting, Soldiers of both armies; then Brutus,
young Cato, Lucilius, and others.

  BRUTUS. Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!
  CATO. What bastard doth not? Who will go with me?
    I will proclaim my name about the field.
    I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
    A foe to tyrants, and my country's friend.
    I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
  BRUTUS. And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I;
    Brutus, my country's friend; know me for Brutus!       Exit.
  LUCILIUS. O young and noble Cato, art thou down?
    Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius,
    And mayst be honor'd, being Cato's son.
  FIRST SOLDIER. Yield, or thou diest.
  LUCILIUS. Only I yield to die.
    [Offers money.] There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight:
    Kill Brutus, and be honor'd in his death.
  FIRST SOLDIER. We must not. A noble prisoner!
  SECOND SOLDIER. Room, ho! Tell Antony, Brutus is ta'en.
  FIRST SOLDIER. I'll tell the news. Here comes the general.

                         Enter Antony.

    Brutus is ta'en, Brutus is ta'en, my lord.
  ANTONY. Where is he?
  LUCILIUS. Safe, Antony, Brutus is safe enough.
    I dare assure thee that no enemy
    Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus;
    The gods defend him from so great a shame!
    When you do find him, or alive or dead,
    He will be found like Brutus, like himself.
  ANTONY. This is not Brutus, friend, but, I assure you,
    A prize no less in worth. Keep this man safe,
    Give him all kindness; I had rather have
    Such men my friends than enemies. Go on,
    And see wheer Brutus be alive or dead,
    And bring us word unto Octavius' tent
    How everything is chanced.                           Exeunt.




SCENE V.
Another part of the field.

Enter Brutus, Dardanius, Clitus, Strato, and Volumnius.

  BRUTUS. Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.
  CLITUS. Statilius show'd the torchlight, but, my lord,
    He came not back. He is or ta'en or slain.
  BRUTUS. Sit thee down, Clitus. Slaying is the word:
    It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus.        Whispers.
  CLITUS. What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.
  BRUTUS. Peace then, no words.
  CLITUS. I'll rather kill myself.
  BRUTUS. Hark thee, Dardanius.                        Whispers.
  DARDANIUS. Shall I do such a deed?
  CLITUS. O Dardanius!
  DARDANIUS. O Clitus!
  CLITUS. What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
  DARDANIUS. To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates.
  CLITUS. Now is that noble vessel full of grief,
    That it runs over even at his eyes.
  BRUTUS. Come hither, good Volumnius, list a word.
  VOLUMNIUS. What says my lord?
  BRUTUS. Why, this, Volumnius:
    The ghost of Caesar hath appear'd to me
    Two several times by night; at Sardis once,
    And this last night here in Philippi fields.
    I know my hour is come.
  VOLUMNIUS. Not so, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Nay I am sure it is, Volumnius.
    Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes;
    Our enemies have beat us to the pit;            Low alarums.
    It is more worthy to leap in ourselves
    Than tarry till they push us. Good Volumnius,
    Thou know'st that we two went to school together;
    Even for that our love of old, I prithee,
    Hold thou my sword-hilts, whilst I run on it.
  VOLUMNIUS. That's not an office for a friend, my lord.
                                                   Alarum still.
  CLITUS. Fly, fly, my lord, there is no tarrying here.
  BRUTUS. Farewell to you, and you, and you, Volumnius.
    Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep;
    Farewell to thee too, Strato. Countrymen,
    My heart doth joy that yet in all my life
    I found no man but he was true to me.
    I shall have glory by this losing day,
    More than Octavius and Mark Antony
    By this vile conquest shall attain unto.
    So, fare you well at once, for Brutus' tongue
    Hath almost ended his life's history.
    Night hangs upon mine eyes, my bones would rest
    That have but labor'd to attain this hour.
                            Alarum. Cry within, 'Fly, fly, fly!'
  CLITUS. Fly, my lord, fly.
  BRUTUS. Hence! I will follow.
                        Exeunt Clitus, Dardanius, and Volumnius.
    I prithee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord.
    Thou art a fellow of a good respect;
    Thy life hath had some smatch of honor in it.
    Hold then my sword, and turn away thy face,
    While I do run upon it. Wilt thou, Strato?
  STRATO. Give me your hand first. Fare you well, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Farewell, good Strato.              Runs on his sword.
    Caesar, now be still;
    I kill'd not thee with half so good a will.            Dies.

     Alarum. Retreat. Enter Octavius, Antony, Messala,
                 Lucilius, and the Army.

  OCTAVIUS. What man is that?
  MESSALA. My master's man. Strato, where is thy master?
  STRATO. Free from the bondage you are in, Messala:
    The conquerors can but make a fire of him;
    For Brutus only overcame himself,
    And no man else hath honor by his death.
  LUCILIUS. So Brutus should be found. I thank thee, Brutus,
    That thou hast proved Lucilius' saying true.
  OCTAVIUS. All that served Brutus, I will entertain them.
    Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?
  STRATO. Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.
  OCTAVIUS. Do so, good Messala.
  MESSALA. How died my master, Strato?
  STRATO. I held the sword, and he did run on it.
  MESSALA. Octavius, then take him to follow thee
    That did the latest service to my master.
  ANTONY. This was the noblest Roman of them all.
    All the conspirators, save only he,
    Did that they did in envy of great Caesar;
    He only, in a general honest thought
    And common good to all, made one of them.
    His life was gentle, and the elements
    So mix'd in him that Nature might stand up
    And say to all the world, 'This was a man!'
  OCTAVIUS. According to his virtue let us use him
    With all respect and rites of burial.
    Within my tent his bones tonight shall lie,
    Most like a soldier, ordered honorably.
    So call the field to rest, and let's away,
    To part the glories of this happy day.              Exeunt.


DE_VERE_No.1:
1 The labouring man that tills the fertile soil
2 And reaps the harvest fruit hath not indeed
3 The gain, but pain, and if for all his toil
4 He gets the straw, the Lord will have the seed.
5 The Manchet fine falls not unto his share,
6 On coarsest cheat his hungry stomach feeds.
7 The Landlord doth possess the finest fare;
8 He pulls the flowers, the other plucks but weeds.
9 The mason poor, that builds the Lordly halls,
10 Dwells not in them, they are for high degree;
11 His Cottage is compact in paper walls,
12 And not with brick or stone as others be.
13 The idle Drone that labours not at all
14 Sucks up the sweet of honey from the Bee.
15 Who worketh most, to their share least doth fall;
16 With due desert reward will never be.
17 The swiftest Hare unto the Mastiff slow
18 Oft times doth fall to him as for a prey;
19 The Greyhound thereby doth miss his game we know
20 For which he made such speedy haste away.
21 So he that takes the pain to pen the book
22 Reaps not the gifts of goodly golden Muse,
23 But those gain that who on the work shall look,
24 And from the sour the sweet by skill doth choose.
25 For he that beats the bush the bird not gets,
26 But who sits still, and holdeth fast the nets. 

DE_VERE_No.2:
1 Even as the wax doth melt, or dew consume away
2 Before the Sun, so I, behold, through careful thoughts decay,
3 For my best luck leads me to such sinister state
4 That I do waste with others love, that hath myself in hate,
5 And he that beats the bush, the wished bird not gets,
6 But such I see as sitteth still, and holds the fowling nets.
7 The Drone more honey sucks, that laboureth not at all,
8 Than doth the Bee, to whose most pain least pleasure doth befall;
9 The Gardener sows the seeds whereof the flowers do grow,
10 And others yet do gather them that took less pain, I know;
11 So I the pleasant grape have pulled from the Vine,
12 And yet I languish in great thirst while others drink the wine.
13 Thus like a woeful wight I wove my web of woe;
14 The more I would weed out my cares, the more they seem to grow.
15 The which betokeneth hope, forsaken is of me,
16 That with the careful culver climbs the worn and withered tree
17 To entertain my thoughts, and there my hap to moan,
18 That never am less idle, lo, than when I am alone.

DE_VERE_No.3:
1 A Crown of Bays shall that man wear
2 That triumphs over me,
3 For Black and Tawny will I wear,
4 Which mourning colours be.
5 The more I followed on, the more she fled away,
6 As Daphne did full long agone, Apollos wishful prey;
7 The more my plaints resound, the less she pities me;
8 The more I sought, the less I found that mine she meant to be.
9 Melpomene, alas, with doleful tunes help then,
10 And sing (bis), woe worth on me, forsaken man.
11 Then Daphnes Bays shall that man wear that triumphs over me,
12 For Black and Tawny will I wear, which mourning colours be.
13 Drown me you trickling tears, you wailful wights of woe;
14 Come help these hands to rent my hairs, my rueful haps to show
15 On whom the scorching flames of love doth feed you see;
16 Ah lalantida, my dear dame hath thus tormented me.
17 Wherefore you Muses nine, with doleful tunes help then,
18 And sing (bis), woe worth on me, forsaken man.
19 Then Daphnes Bays shall that man wear that triumphs over me,
20 For Black and Tawny will I wear, which mourning colours be.
21 An Anchors life to lead, with nails to scratch my grave,
22 Where earthly Worms on me shall feed, is all the joys I crave,
23 And hide myself from shame, sith that mine eyes do see,
24 Ah lalantida, my dear dame hath thus tormented me.
25 And all that present be, with doleful tunes help then,
26 And sing (bis), woe worth on me, forsaken man.

DE_VERE_No.4:
1 Framed in the front of forlorn hope, past all recovery,
2 I stayless stand tabide the shock of shame and infamy.
3 My life, through lingering long, is lodged in lair of loathsome ways,
4 My death delayed to keep from life the harm of hapless days.
5 My sprites, my heart, my wit and force in deep distress are drowned;
6 The only loss of my good name is of these griefs the ground.
7 And since my mind, my wit, my head, my voice and tongue are weak
8 To utter, move, devise, conceive, sound forth, declare and speak
9 Such piercing plaints as answer might, or would, my woeful case,
10 Help crave I must, and crave I will, with tears upon my face
11 Of all that may in heaven or hell, in earth or air, be found
12 To wail with me this loss of mine, as of these griefs the ground.
13 Help gods, help saints, help sprites and powers that in the heaven do dwell,
14 Help ye that are to wail, ay wont, ye howling hounds of hell,
15 Help man, help beasts, help birds and worms that on the earth doth toil,
16 Help fish, help fowl that flocks and feeds upon the salt sea soil,
17 Help echo that in air doth flee, shrill voices to resound
18 To wail this loss of my good name, as of these griefs the ground.

DE_VERE_No.5:
1 I am not as I seem to be,
2 Nor when I smile I am not glad,
3 A thrall although you count me free
4 I, most in mirth, most pensive-sad;
5 I smile to shade my bitter spite,
6 As Hannibal, that saw in sight
7 His country soil, with Carthage town,
8 By Roman force defaced down.
9 And Caesar, that presented was
10 With noble Pompeys princely head,
11 As twere some judge to rule the case,
12 A flood of tears he seemed to shed;
13 Although indeed it sprung of joy,
14 Yet others thought it was annoy;
15 Thus contraries be used, I find,
16 Of wise to cloak the covert mind.
17 I Hannibal, that smiles for grief,
18 And let you Caesars tears suffice,
19 The one that laughs at his mischief,
20 The other all for joy that cries;
21 I smile to see me scorned so,
22 You weep for joy to see me woe,
23 And I a heart by love slain dead
24 Presents, in place of Pompeys head.
25 O cruel hap and hard estate
26 That forceth me to love my foe,
27 Accursed by so foul a fate
28 My choice for to prefix it so,
29 So long to fight with secret sore,
30 And find no secret salve therefor;
31 Some purge their pain by plaint, I find,
32 But I in vain do breathe my wind.

DE_VERE_No.6:
1 If care or skill could conquer vain desire,
2 Or reasons reins my strong affection stay,
3 Then should my sighs to quiet breast retire,
4 And shun such signs as secret thoughts bewray;
5 Uncomely love, which now lurks in my breast,
6 Should cease my grief, through wisdoms power oppressed.
7 But who can leave to look on Venus face,
8 Or yieldeth not to Junos high estate?
9 What wit so wise as gives not Pallas place?
10 These virtues rare each God did yield a mate,
11 Save her alone who yet on earth doth reign,
12 Whose beautys string no Gods can well distrain.
13 What worldly wight can hope for heavenly hire
14 When only sighs must make his secret moan?
15 A silent suit doth seld to Grace aspire;
16 My hapless hap doth roll the restless stone;
17 Yet Phoebe fair disdained the heavens above,
18 To joy on earth her poor Endymions love.
19 Rare is reward where none can justly crave,
20 For chance is choice where reason makes no claim;
21 Yet luck sometimes despairing souls doth save:
22 A happy star made Gyges joy attain;
23 A slavish smith of rude and rascal race
24 Found means in time to gain a Goddess grace.
25 Then lofty Love thy sacred sails advance;
26 My seething seas shall flow with streams of tears.
27 Amidst disdain drive forth my doleful chance;
28 A valiant mind no deadly danger fears.
29 Who loves aloft and sets his heart on high,
30 Deserves no pain, though he do pine and die

DE_VERE_No.7:
1 My meaning is to work what wonders love hath wrought,
2 Wherewith I muse why men of wit have love so dearly bought;
3 For love is worse than hate, and eke more harm hath done:
4 Record I take of those that rede of Paris, Priams son.
5 It seemed the God of sleep had mazed so much his wits
6 When he refused wit for love, which cometh but by fits;
7 But why accuse I him, whom earth hath covered long?
8 There be of his posterity alive, I do him wrong.
9 Whom I might well condemn to be a cruel judge
10 Unto myself, who hath the crime in others that I grudge.

DE_VERE_No.8:
1 The lively lark stretched forth her wing,
2 The messenger of morning bright,
3 And with her cheerful voice did sing
4 The days approach, discharging night,
5 When that Aurora, blushing red,
6 Descried the guilt of Thetis bed.
7 I went abroad to take the air,
8 And in the meads I met a knight,
9 Clad in carnation colour fair;
10 I did salute this gentle wight,
11 Of him I did his name inquire.
12 He sighed, and said he was desire.
13 Desire I did desire to stay,
14 Awhile with him I craved to talk;
15 The courteous knight said me no nay,
16 But hand in hand with me did walk.
17 Then of desire I asked again
18 What thing did please and what did pain?
19 He smiled, and thus he answered then,
20 Desire can have no greater pain
21 Than for to see another man
22 That he desireth to obtain;
23 Nor greater joy can be than this,
24 Than to enjoy that others miss.

DE_VERE_No.9:
1 The trickling tears that fall along my cheeks,
2 The secret sighs that show my inward grief,
3 The present pains perforce that love ay seeks,
4 Bid me renew my cares without relief
5 In woeful song, in dole display,
6 My pensive heart for to bewray.
7 Bewray thy grief, thou woeful heart, with speed,
8 Resign thy voice to her that caused thy woe;
9 With irksome cries bewail thy late-done deed,
10 For she thou lovest is sure thy mortal foe,
11 And help for thee there is none sure,
12 But still in pain thou must endure.
13 The stricken Deer hath help to heal his wound,
14 The haggard hawk with toil is made full tame,
15 The strongest tower the Cannon lays on ground,
16 The wisest wit that ever had the fame
17 Was thrall to Love by Cupids sleights;
18 Then weigh my case with equal weights.
19 She is my joy, she is my care and woe,
20 She is my pain, she is my ease therefor,
21 She is my death, she is my life also,
22 She is my salve, she is my wounded sore;
23 In fine, she hath the hand and knife
24 That may both save and end my life.
25 And shall I live on earth to be her thrall?
26 And shall I sue and serve her all in vain?
27 And shall I kiss the steps that she lets fall?
28 And shall I pray the gods to keep the pain
29 From her, that is so cruel still?
30 No, no, on her work all your will.
31 And let her feel the power of all your might,
32 And let her have her most desire with speed,
33 And let her pine away both day and night,
34 And let her moan, and none lament her need,
35 And let all those that shall her see
36 Despise her state, and pity me.

DE_VERE_No.10:
1 Fain would I sing but fury makes me fret,
2 And rage hath sworn to seek revenge of wrong;
3 My mazed mind in malice so is set
4 As death shall daunt my deadly dolours long.
5 Patience perforce is such a pinching pain,
6 As die I will or suffer wrong again.
7 I am no sot to suffer such abuse
8 As doth bereave my heart of his delight,
9 Nor will I frame myself to such as use
10 With calm consent to suffer such despite.
11 No quiet sleep shall once possess mine eye,
12 Till wit have wrought his will on injury.
13 My heart shall fail and hand shall lose his force,
14 But some device shall pay despite his due;
15 And fury shall consume my careful corse,
16 Or raze the ground whereon my sorrow grew.
17 Lo, thus in rage of ruthful mind refused,
18 I rest revenged of whom I am abused.

DE_VERE_No.11:
1 When wert thou born, desire?
2 In pomp and prime of May.
3 By whom, sweet boy, wert thou begot?
4 By good conceit, men say.
5 Tell me, who was thy nurse?
6 Fresh youth in sugared joy.
7 What was thy meat and daily food?
8 Sad sighs with great annoy.
9 What hadst thou then to drink?
10 Unfeigned lovers tears.
11 What cradle wert thou rocked in?
12 In hope devoid of fears.
13 What brought thee then asleep?
14 Sweet speech, that liked me best.
15 And where is now thy dwelling-place?
16 In gentle hearts I rest.
17 Doth company displease?
18 It doth in many a one.
19 Where would desire then choose to be?
20 He likes to muse alone.
21 What feedeth most your sight?
22 To gaze on favour still.
23 What findest thou most to be thy foe?
24 Disdain of my goodwill.
25 Will ever age or death
26 Bring thee unto decay?
27 No, no, desire both lives and dies
28 Ten thousand times a day.

DE_VERE_No.12:
1 Winged with desire, I seek to mount on high,
2 Clogged with mishap yet am I kept full low;
3 Who seeks to live and finds the way to die,
4 Sith comfort ebbs, and cares do daily flow,
5 But sad despair would have me to retire,
6 When smiling hope sets forward my desire.
7 I still do toil and never am at rest,
8 Enjoying least when I do covet most;
9 With weary thoughts are my green years oppressed,
10 To danger drawn from my desired coast;
11 Now crazed with Care, then haled up with Hope,
12 With world at will yet wanting wished scope.
13 I like in heart, yet dare not say I love,
14 And looks alone do lend me chief relief.
15 I dwelt sometimes at rest yet must remove,
16 With feigned joy I hide my secret grief.
17 I would possess yet needs must flee the place
18 Where I do seek to win my chiefest grace.
19 Lo, thus I live twixt fear and comfort tossed,
20 With least abode where best I feel content;
21 I seld resort where I should settle most,
22 My sliding times too soon with her are spent;
23 I hover high and soar where Hope doth tower,
24 Yet froward Fate defers my happy hour.
25 I live abroad but still in secret grief,
26 Then least alone when most I seem to lurk;
27 I speak of peace, and live in endless strife,
28 And when I play then are my thoughts at work;
29 In person far that am in mind full near,
30 Making light show where I esteem most dear.
31 A malcontent yet seem I pleased still,
32 Bragging of heaven yet feeling pains of hell
33 But Time shall frame a time unto my will,
34 Whenas in sport this earnest will I tell;
35 Till then, sweet friend, abide these storms with me,
36 Which shall in joys of either fortunes be.

DE_VERE_No.13:
1 Whereas the heart at tennis plays, and men to gaming fall,
2 Love is the court, hope is the house, and favour serves the ball.
3 The ball itself is true desert; the line, which measure shows,
4 Is reason, whereon judgment looks how players win or lose.
5 The jetty is deceitful guile, the stopper, jealousy,
6 Which hath Sir Argus hundred eyes wherewith to watch and pry.
7 The fault, wherewith fifteen is lost, is want of wit and sense,
8 And he that brings the racket in is double diligence.
9 And lo, the racket is freewill, which makes the ball rebound;
10 And noble beauty is the chase, of every game the ground.
11 But rashness strikes the ball awry, and where is oversight?
12 A bandy ho, the people cry, and so the ball takes flight.
13 Now in the end, good-liking proves content the game and gain.
14 Thus in a tennis knit I love, a pleasure mixed with pain.

DE_VERE_No.14:
1 What cunning can express
2 The favour of her face,
3 To whom in this distress
4 I do appeal for grace?
5 A thousand Cupids fly
6 About her gentle eye.
7 From whence each throws a dart,
8 That kindleth soft sweet fire,
9 Within my sighing heart,
10 Possessed by desire;
11 No sweeter life I try,
12 Than in her love to die.
13 The Lily in the field,
14 That glories in his white,
15 For pureness now must yield
16 And render up his right;
17 Heaven pictured in her face
18 Doth promise joy and grace.
19 Fair Cynthias silver light,
20 That beats on running streams,
21 Compares not with her white,
22 Whose hairs are all sunbeams;
23 Her virtues so do shine,
24 As day unto mine eyne.
25 With this there is a Red
26 Exceeds the Damask Rose,
27 Which in her cheeks is spread,
28 Whence every favour grows;
29 In sky there is no star
30 That she surmounts not far.
31 When Phoebus from the bed
32 Of Thetis doth arise,
33 The morning, blushing red,
34 In fair carnation wise,
35 He shows it in her face
36 As Queen of every grace.
37 This pleasant Lily white,
38 This taint of roseate red,
39 This Cynthias silver light,
40 This sweet fair Dea spread,
41 These sunbeams in mine eye,
42 These beauties make me die.

DE_VERE_No.15:
1 Who taught thee first to sigh, alas, my heart?
2 Who taught thy tongue the woeful words of plaint?
3 Who filled thine eyes with tears of bitter smart?
4 Who gave thee grief and made thy joys so faint?
Love
5 Who first did print with colours pale thy face?
6 Who first did break thy sleeps of quiet rest?
7 Above the rest in Court, who gave thee Grace?
8 Who made thee strive in virtue to be best?
Love
9 In constant troth to bide so firm and sure,
10 To scorn the world, regarding but thy friend,
11 With patient mind each passion to endure,
12 In one desire to settle to thy end?
Love
13 Love then thy choice, wherein such faith doth bind,
14 As nought but death may ever change thy mind.

DE_VERE_No.16:
1 Were I a king I could command content;
2 Were I obscure unknown should be my cares,
3 And were I dead no thought should me torment,
4 Nor words, nor wrongs, nor loves, nor hopes, nor fears;
5 A doubtful choice of these things one to crave,
6 A kingdom or a cottage or a grave.

DE_VERE_No.17:
1 Sitting alone upon my thought, in melancholy mood,
2 In sight of sea, and at my back an ancient hoary wood,
3 I saw a fair young lady come, her secret fears to wail,
4 Clad all in colour of a nun, and covered with a veil.
5 Yet, for the day was clear and calm, I might discern her face,
6 As one might see a damask rose hid under crystal glass.
7 Three times with her soft hand full hard on her left side she knocks,
8 And sighed so sore as might have moved some pity in the rocks.
9 From sighs, and shedding amber tears, into sweet song she brake,
10 When thus the echo answered her to every word she spake.
11 O heavens! Who was the first that bred in me this fever?
Vere.
12 Who was the first that gave the wound, whose scar I wear for ever?
Vere.
13 What tyrant Cupid to my harms usurps the golden quiver?
Vere.
14 What wight first caught this heart, and can from bondage it deliver?
Vere.
15 Yet who doth most adore this wight, O hollow caves, tell true?
You.
16 What nymph deserves his liking best, yet doth in sorrow rue?
You.
17 What makes him not regard good will with some remorse or ruth?
Youth.
18 What makes him show, besides his birth, such pride and such untruth?
Youth.
19 May I his beauty match with love, if he my love will try?
Aye.
20 May I requite his birth with faith? Then faithful will I die?
Aye.
21 And I, that knew this lady well,
22 Said Lord, how great a miracle,
23 To her how echo told the truth,
24 As true as Phoebus oracle.

DE_VERE_No.18:
(see also four additional stanzas in No. 18b, p. 109)
1 My mind to me a kingdom is;
2 Such perfect joy therein I find
3 That it excels all other bliss
4 That world affords or grows by kind.
5 Though much I want which most men have,
6 Yet still my mind forbids to crave.
7 No princely pomp, no wealthy store,
8 No force to win the victory,
9 No wily wit to salve a sore,
10 No shape to feed each gazing eye,
11 To none of these I yield as thrall.
12 For why? My mind doth serve for all.
13 I see how plenty suffers oft,
14 How hasty climbers soon do fall;
15 I see that those that are aloft
16 Mishap doth threaten most of all;
17 They get with toil, they keep with fear.
18 Such cares my mind could never bear.
19 Content I live, this is my stay;
20 I seek no more than may suffice;
21 I press to bear no haughty sway;
22 Look what I lack my mind supplies.
23 Lo, thus I triumph like a king,
24 Content with that my mind doth bring.
25 Some have too much yet still do crave;
26 I little have and seek no more.
27 They are but poor though much they have
28 And I am rich with little store.
29 They poor, I rich; they beg, I give;
30 They lack, I leave; they pine, I live.
31 I laugh not at anothers loss,
32 I grudge not at anothers gain.
33 No worldly waves my mind can toss;
34 My state at one doth still remain.
35 I fear no foe nor fawning friend,
36 I loathe not life nor dread my end.
37 Some weigh their pleasure by their lust,
38 Their wisdom by their rage of will;
39 Their treasure is their only trust,
40 And cloaked craft their store of skill.
41 But all the pleasure that I find,
42 Is to maintain a quiet mind.
43 My wealth is health and perfect ease,
44 My conscience clear my chief defense;
45 I neither seek by bribes to please
46 Nor by deceit to breed offense.
47 Thus do I live, thus will I die.
48 Would all did so as well as I.

DE_VERE_No.18B:
1 I joy not in no earthly bliss,
2 I force not Croesus wealth a straw.
3 For care I know not what it is,
4 I fear not Fortunes fatal law.
5 My mind is such as may not move
6 For beauty bright nor force of love.
7 I wish but what I have at will,
8 I wander not to seek for more.
9 I like the plain, I climb no hill,
10 In greatest storms I sit on shore
11 And laugh at those that toil in vain,
12 To get what must be lost again.
13 I kiss not where I wish to kill,
14 I feign not love where most I hate.
15 I break no sleep to win my will,
16 I wait not at the mightys gate.
17 I scorn no poor, nor fear no rich,
18 I feel no want nor have too much.
19 The Court ne cart I like ne loathe,
20 Extremes are counted worst of all.
21 The golden mean betwixt them both
22 Doth surest sit and fear no fall.
23 This is my choice, for why I find
24 No wealth is like the quiet mind.

DE_VERE_No.19:
1 If women could be fair and yet not fond,
2 Or that their love were firm, not fickle still,
3 I would not marvel that they make men bond
4 By service long to purchase their good will.
5 But when I see how frail those creatures are,
6 I muse that men forget themselves so far.
7 To mark the choice they make and how they change,
8 How oft from Phoebus they do flee to Pan;
9 Unsettled still, like haggards wild they range,
10 These gentle birds that fly from man to man.
11 Who would not scorn and shake them from the fist,
12 And let them fly, fair fools, which way they list?
13 Yet for disport we fawn and flatter both,
14 To pass the time when nothing else can please,
15 And train them to our lure with subtle oath,
16 Till weary of their wiles ourselves we ease.
17 And then we say when we their fancy try,
18 To play with fools, oh what a fool was I.

DE_VERE_No.20:
1 In peascod time when hound to horn gives ear while buck is killed,
2 And little boys with pipes of corn sit keeping beasts in field,
3 I went to gather strawberries tho when woods and groves were fair,
4 And parched my face with Phoebus, lo, by walking in the air.
5 I lay me down all by a stream and banks all overhead,
6 And there I found the strangest dream, that ever young man had.
7 Methought I saw each Christmas game, both revels all and some,
8 And each thing else that man could name or might by fancy come,
9 The substance of the thing I saw, in silence pass it shall,
10 Because I lack the skill to draw, the order of them all.
11 But Venus shall not scape my pen, whose maidens in disdain
12 Sit feeding on the hearts of men, whom Cupids bow hath slain.
13 And that blind Boy sat all in blood, bebathed to the ears,
14 And like a conqueror he stood, and scorned lovers tears.
15 I have more hearts, quoth he, at call, than Caesar could command.
16 And like the deer I make them fall, that overcross the land.
17 I do increase their wandring wits, till that I dim their sight.
18  Tis I that do bereave them of their joy and chief delight.
19 Thus did I see this bragging Boy advance himself even then,
20 Deriding at the wanton toys, of foolish loving men,
21 Which when I saw for anger then my panting breast did beat,
22 To see how he sat taunting them, upon his royal seat.
23 O then I wished I had been free, and cured were my wound;
24 Methought I could display his arms, and coward deeds expound.
25 But I perforce must stay my muse, full sore against my heart,
26 For that I am a subject wight, and lanced with his dart.
27 But if that I achieve the fort, which I have took in charge,
28 My hand and head with quivering quill, shall blaze his name at large.

DE_VERE_No.21:
My Lord, I have understood by your Lordship's letters that Robert Christmas, according to my appointment, hath repaired to your good Lordship about my causes, and as your Lordship thinks good therein, as touching a new survey, so do I determine shall be done; for both as your Lordship perceives, and also myself, I have been greatly abused in the former by such as I put in trust tofore; but for that is past, now I have no other remedy but to look better to amend the fault in the rest of my dealings hereafter, and as for my timber at Colne Park, therein I had no other meaning save only to make, as it were, a yearly rent, so as I may without disparking the ground. But now for the surveyor which your Lordship hath named, I must get him by your Lordship's means and for your Lordship's sake, for I am utterly unacquainted with him.

And as for those large leases which your Lordship hath been advertised of to be granted by me, I do assure your Lordship, without dissembling my faults to you to whom I perceive myself so much to be bound unto for your singular care over my well-doing, I must confess my negligence and too little care, with the too too [sic?] much trust I have put to some over mine own doings; it may be I am greatly abused, but as yet, till I search into those things now, upon your Lordship's most gracious admonitions, I do not know, but it is likelier to be as your Lordship doth guess than otherwise and, if it be not so, it is more by good hap than of my providence.

The device of making free my copyholders, my Lord, I never thought of otherwise than a motion made to me by Robert Christmas wherein, among the other things, I bade him tell it your Lordship, at whose liking or disliking I was to be ruled in anything, knowing if it were a thing fit or unfit for me I should, by your Lordship's good advice, quickly understand, and so I left it to be not done, or taken in hand. And thus, sir, for these matters, both in this as in all other things, I am to be governed and commanded at your Lordship's good devotion.

I would to God your Lordship would let me understand some of your news (which here doth ring doubtfully in the ears of every man) of the murder of the Admiral of France and a number of noblemen and worthy gentlemen, and such as greatly have in their lifetimes honoured the Queen's Majesty our mistress, on whose tragedies we have a number of French Aeneases in this city that tells of their own overthrows with tears falling from their eyes, a piteous thing to hear, but a cruel and far more grievous thing we must deem it then to see. All rumours here are but confused of those troops that are escaped from Paris and Rouen, where Monsieur hath also been and, like a vesper Sicilianus, as they say, that cruelty spreads over all France, whereof your Lordship is better advertised than we are here. And sith the world is so full of treasons and vile instruments daily to attempt new and unlooked for things, good my Lord, I shall affectiously and heartily desire your Lordship to be careful both of yourself and of her Majesty, that your friends may long enjoy you, and you them. I speak because I am not ignorant what practices have been made against your person lately by Mather and later, as I understand, by foreign practices, if it be true. And think, if the Admiral in France was an eyesore or beam in the eyes of the papists, that the Lord Treasurer of England is a block and a cross-bar in their way, whose remove they will never stick to attempt, seeing they have prevailed so well in others'.

This estate hath depended on you a great while, as all the world doth judge; and now all men's eyes, not being occupied any more on these lost lords are, as it were, on a sudden bent and fixed on you, as a singular hope and pillar whereto the religion hath to lean. And blame me not, though I am bolder with your Lordship at this present than my custom is, for I am one that count myself a follower of yours now in all fortunes, and what shall hap to you, I count it hap to myself or, at the least, I will make myself a voluntary partaker of it.

Thus, my Lord, I humbly desire your Lordship to pardon my youth, but to take in good part my zeal and affection towards your Lordship, as on whom I have builded my foundation either to stand or fall. And good my Lord, think I do not this presumptuously, as to advise you that am but to take advice of your Lordship, but to admonish you as one with whom I would spend my blood and life, so much you have made me yours. And I do protest, there is nothing more desired of me than so to be taken and accounted of you. Thus, with my hearty commendations and your daughter's, we leave you to the custody of Almighty God. Your Lordship's affectioned son-in-law.

Edward Oxenford

DE_VERE_No.22:
My very good Lord, I hope it is not out of your remembrance how long sithence I have been a suitor to her Majesty that she would give me leave to try my title to the forest at the law, but I found that so displeasing unto her that, in place of receiving that ordinary favour which is of course granted to the meanest subject, I was browbeaten and had many bitter speeches given me; nevertheless, at length, by means of some of the Lords of the Council, among which your Lordship especially, her Majesty was persuaded to give me ear. At that time, which was at Somerset House (if your Lordship please to call to mind), her Majesty would needs have it committed unto arbitrers, pretending therein to do me especial favour in cutting off the long circumstances of the law and charges pertaining thereto. But after I had consented thereunto, for me could be no other arbiter permitted than the Lord Chancellor, whom she had chosen for herself; this I am assured your Lordship hath good cause to remember by her Majesty's exception against you, in that she thought you partial to your son-in-law. But these things I call only to mind for your Lordship's better remembrance which, through so many affairs, otherwise, in so long a time, it is no marvel if perhaps you have easily forgotten. Therefore I will to purpose only further call to remembrance the success of this arbitrament, which was thus. After much ado, and a good year spent by delays from her Majesty, my Lord Chancellor, then Sir Christopher Hatton, being earnestly called upon, appointed a time of hearing, both for her Majesty's learned counsel at the law and mine, whereupon what he conceived thereby of my title, he was ready to have made his report unto her Majesty. But such was my misfortune (I do not think her mind to do me any wrong), that she flatly refused therein to hear my Lord Chancellor, and for a final answer commanded me no more to follow the suit for, whether it was hers or mine, she was resolved to dispose thereof at her pleasure. A strange sentence, methought, which, being justly considered, I may say she had done me more favour if she had suffered me to try my title at law, than this arbitrament under pretence of expedition and grace; the extremity had been far more safe than the remedy which I was persuaded to accept. But after I had made some complaint of this hard determination, yet in so desperate a state, she promised this relief to my cause that, in some other matter, that should be as commodious as that unto me, she would recompense me in the meanwhile. Hence riseth the cause, my Lord, wherefore I have preferred many suits to her Majesty, but have found in them all the same delays and difficulties that I did in the other before. But now the ground whereon I lay my suit being so just and reasonable that either I should expect some satisfaction by way of recompense, or restoration of mine own (as I am yet persuaded till law hath convinced me), these are most earnestly to desire a continuance of your Lordship's favour and furtherance in my suit which I made at Greenwich to her Majesty, at her last being there, about three commodities, to wit, the oils, wools and fruits, in giving therefor as then my proffer was. I do the rather now renew the same for that I do not hear as yet they are disposed otherwise, and that the time is fittest, as well as for her Majesty's commodity as his that shall take it, and considering (if her Majesty will have a just consideration of the premises) I am to challenge and expect somewhat. Your Lordship knows the whole process of the matter, and can better judge than any other (as to whom my estate is best known, & how hardly I may forbear so great an interest without any recompense) and, therefore, as to the meetest (for that my state and cause, both in right and conscience, is best understood) to conceive of the just desire I make of this suit, I do address myself to your Lordship, most earnestly to crave both your opinion and counsel, your favour and furtherance, whether I were best to follow this suit which I have commenced or, it standing so that there is no good or hope to be done or conceived therein, to seek again her Majesty's favour that I might proceed in law to try my title to the forest. And thus desiring your Lordship to hold me excused for that I am so long in a matter that concerneth me so much, I will make an end, this 25 of October, 1593.

And always rest your Lordship's to command.

Edward Oxenford

DE_VERE_No.23:
Seeing that it hath pleased your Majesty of your most gracious inclination to justice & right to restore me to be keeper of your game as well in your forest of Waltham, as also in Havering Park, I can do no less in duty and love to your Majesty but employ myself in the execution thereof. And to the end you might the better know in what sort both the forest & the park have been abused, and yet continued, as well in destroying of the deer as in spoiling of your demesne wood by such as have patents & had licences heretofore for felling of timber in the Queen's time lately deceased, presuming thereby that they may do what they list, I was bold to send unto your Majesty a man skilful, learned & experienced in forest causes, who being a dweller and eye-witness thereof might inform you of the truth. And because your Majesty upon a bare information could not be so well satisfied of every particular as by lawful testimony & examination of credible witness upon oath, according to your Majesty's appointment by commission a course hath been taken in which your Majesty shall be fully satisficed of truth. This commission, together with the depositions of the witness, I do send to your Majesty by this bearer, who briefly can inform you of the whole contence. So that now, having lawfully proved unto your Majesty that Sir John Gray hath killed and destroyed your deer in Havering Park without any warrant for the same, his patent is void in law, & therefore I most humbly beseech your Majesty to make him an example for all others that shall in like sort abuse their places, & to restore me to the possession thereof, in both which your Majesty shall do but justice and right to the one & other. This 30 of January 1603. Your Majesty's most humble subject and servant, E. Oxenforde.

DE_VERE_No.24:
My very honorable Sir
Sir, I have received your letters, full of humanity and courtesy, and strongly resembling
your great love and singular affection towards me, like true children duly procreated of
such a mother, for whom I find myself from day to day more bound to your honor. Your
good admonishments for the observance of good order according to your appointed rules,
I am resolved (God aiding) to keep with all diligence, as a thing that I may know and
consider to tend especially to my own good and profit, using therein the advice and 
authority of those who are near me, whose discretion I esteem so great (if it is convenient
to me to say something to their advantage) that not only will they comport themselves
according as a given time requires it, but will as well do what is more, as long as I govern
myself as you have ordered and commanded. As to the order of my study, because it
requires a long discourse to explain it in detail, and the time is short at this hour, I pray
you affectionately to excuse me therefrom for the present, assuring you that by the first
passer-by I shall make it known to you at full length. In the meantime, I pray to God to
give you health. Edward Oxinford.

DE_VERE_No.25:
My Lord, having th' opportunity to write by this bearer who departeth from us here in
Padua this night, although I cannot make so large a write as I would gladly desire, yet I
thought it not fit to let so short a time slip, wherefore remembering my commendations to
your good Lordship, these shall be to desire you to pardon the shortness of my letters, and
to impute it at this present to the haste of this messenger's departure.
And as concerning mine own matters, I shall desire your Lordship to make no stay of the
sales of my land, but that all things (according to my determination before I came away,
with those that I appointed last by my servant, William Booth) might go forward
according to mine order taken, without any other alteration.
Thus recommending myself unto your Lordship again, and to my Lady your wife, with
mine, I leave further to trouble your Lordship. From Padua, the 27th of November.
Your Lordship's to command,
Edward Oxenford

DE_VERE_No.26:
My good Lord, having looked for your Lordship's letters a great while, at length when I grew to despair of them I received two from your Lordship.  Three packets which at sundry times I had sent this summer towards England returned back again by reason the plague being in the passages, none were suffered to pass, but as they came were returned back, which I came not to the knowledge of till my return now to Venice, where I have been grieved with a fever.  Yet with the help of God now I have recovered the same and am past the danger thereof, though brought very weak thereby and hindered from a great deal of travel, which grieves me most, fearing my time not sufficient for my desire, for although I have seen so much as sufficeth me, yet would I have time to profit thereby. 
 
Your Lordship seems desirous to know how I like Italy, what is mine intention in travel, and when I mean to return.  For my liking of Italy, my Lord, I am glad I have seen it, and I care not ever to see it any more unless it be to serve my prince or country.  For mine intention to travel, I am desirous to see more of Germany, wherefore I shall desire your Lordship, with my Lord of Leicester, to procure me the next summer to continue my licence, at the end of which I mean undoubtedly to return.  I thought to have seen Spain, but by Italy I guess the worse. 

I have sent one of my servants into England with some new disposition of my things there, wherefore I will not trouble your Lordship in these letters with the same. 
 
If this sickness had not happened unto me, which hath taken away this chiefest time of travel at this present I would not have written for further leave, but to supply the which I doubt not her Majesty will not deny me so small a favour. 
 
By reason of my great charges of travel and sickness I have taken up of Mr Baptisto Nigrone 500 crowns, which I shall desire your Lordship to see there repaid, hoping by this time my money which is made of the sale of my land is all come in. 
 
Likewise I shall desire your Lordship that whereas I had one Luke Atslowe that served, who now is become a lewd subject to her Majesty and an evil member to his country, which had certain leases of me, I do think according to law he leeseth them all to the Queen sith he is become one of the Romish church, and there hath performed all such ceremonies as might reconcile himself to that church, having used lewd speeches against the Queen's Majesty's supremacy, legitimation, government and particular life, and is here, as it were, a practiser upon our nation.  Then this is my desire, that your Lordship, if it be so as I do take it, would procure those leases into my hands again, whereas I have understood by my Lord of Bedford they have hardly dealt with my tenants. 
 
Thus thanking your Lordship for your good news of my wife's delivery, I recommend myself unto your favour, and although I write for a few months more, yet though I have them, so it may fall out I will shorten them myself. 

DE_VERE_No.27:
My Lord, although I have forborne in some respect which I hold private to myself either to write or come unto your Lordship, yet had I determined, as opportunity should have served me, to have accomplished the same in compass of a few days.  But now, urged thereunto by your letters to satisfy you the sooner, I must let your Lordship understand thus much.  That is, until I can better satisfy or advertise myself of some mislikes, I am not determined, as touching my wife, to accompany her.  What they are, because some are not to be spoken of or written upon as imperfections, I will not deal withal.  Some that otherways discontent me, I will not blaze or publish until it please me.  And last of all, I mean not to weary my life any more with such troubles and molestations as I have endured, nor will I, to please your Lordship only, discontent myself.  Wherefore as your Lordship very well writeth unto me that you mean, if it standeth with my liking, to receive her into your house, these are likewise to let your Lordship understand that it doth very well content me; for there, as your daughter or her mother's, more than my wife, you may take comfort of her, and I, rid of the cumber thereby, shall remain well eased of many griefs.  I do not doubt but she hath sufficient proportion for her being to live upon and to maintain herself. 
 
This might have been done through private conference before, and had not needed to have been the fable of the world if you would have had the patience to have understood me, but I do not know by what or whose advice it was to run that course so contrary to my will or meaning which made her disgraced to the world, raised suspicions openly that with private conference might have been more silently handled, and hath given me more greater cause to mislike.  Wherefore I desire your Lordship in these causes (now you shall understand me) not to urge me any farther.  And so I write unto your Lordship, as you have done unto me, this Friday, the 27th of April. 

DE_VERE_No.28:
My very good Lord, yesterday at your Lordship's earnest request I had some conference with you about your daughter, wherein for that her Majesty had so often moved me, and for that you dealt so earnestly with me, to content as much as I could I did agree that you might bring her to the court with condition that she should not come when I was present nor at any time to have speech with me, and further that your Lordship should not urge farther in her cause.  But now I understand that your Lordship means this day to bring her to the court, and that you mean afterward to prosecute the cause with further hope.  Now if your Lordship shall do so, then shall you take more in hand than I have or can promise you.  For always I have and will still prefer mine own content before others', and observing that wherein I may temper or moderate for your sake, I will do most willingly.  Wherefore I shall desire your Lordship not to take advantage of my promise till you have given me some honourable assurance by letter or word of your performance of the condition, which being observed I could yield, as it is my duty, to her Majesty's request, and bear with your fatherly desire towards her.  Otherwise all that is done can stand to none effect. 
 
From my lodging at Charing Cross, this morning. 

DE_VERE_No.29:
My Lord, Robin Christmas did yesterday tell me how honourably you had dealt with her Majesty as touching my liberty, and that as this day she had made promise to your Lordship that it should be, unless your Lordship shall make some to put her Majesty in mind thereof, I fear in these other causes of the two Lords she will forget me, for she is nothing of her own disposition, as I find, so ready to deliver as speedy to commit, and every little trifle gives her matter for a long delay. 

I willed E. Hammond to report unto your Lordship her Majesty's message unto me by Mr Secretary Walsingham, which was to this effect: first, that she would have heard the matter again touching Henry Howard, Southwell and Arundel; then, that she understood I meant to cut down all my woods, especially about my house, which she did not so well like of as if I should sell some land else otherwhere; and last, that she heard that I had been hardly used by some of my servants during this time of my commit, wherein she promised her aid, so far as she could with justice, to redress the loss I had sustained thereby, to which I made answer as I willed Hammond to relate unto your Lordship. 
 
Further, my Lord, whereof I am desirous something to write, I have understood of certain of my men hath resorted unto your Lordship and sought, by false reports of other of their fellows, both to abuse your Lordship and me.  But for that this bearer seems most herein to be touched, I have sent him unto your Lordship, as is his earnest desire, that your Lordship might so know him as your evil opinion, being conceived amiss by these lewd fellows, may be removed.  And truly, my Lord, I hear of those things wherewith he is charged and, I can assure you, wrongfully and slanderously, but the world is so cunning as of a shadow they can make a substance, and of a likelihood a troth.  And these fellows, if they be those which I suppose, I do not doubt but so to decipher them to the world as easily your Lordship shall look into their lewdness and unfaithfulness, which, till my liberty, I mean to defer, as more mindful of that importing me most at this time than yet seeking to revenge myself of such perverse and impudent dealing of servants, which I know have not wanted encouragement and setting on. 
 
But letting these things pass for a while, I must not forget to give your Lordship those thanks which are due to you for this your honourable dealing to her Majesty in my behalf, which I hope shall not be without effect, the which attending from the court, I will take my leave of your Lordship, and rest at your commandment at my house this morning.   

DE_VERE_No.30:
I have been an earnest suitor unto your Lordship for my Lord Lumley, that it would please you for my sake to stand his good Lord and friend which, as I perceive, your Lordship hath already very honourably [performed, for?] the which, [as I?] am in a number of things more than I can reckon bound unto your Lordship, so am I in this likewise, especially for he hath matched with a near kinswoman of mine to whose father I always was beholding unto for his assured and kind disposition unto me.  Further, among all the rest of my blood, this only remains in account either of me or else of them, as your Lordship doth know very well, the rest having embraced further alliances to leave their nearer consanguinity.  And as I hope your Lordship doth account me now one whom you have so much bound as I am to be yours before any else in the world, both through match, whereby [I?] count my greatest stay, and by your Lordship's friendly usage and sticking by me in this time wherein I am hedged in with so many enemies, so likewise I hope your Lordship will take all them for your followers and most at command which are inclined and affected to me.  Wherefore I shall once again be thus bold with your Lordship to be [the more?] importunate in this matter [for?] your Lordship's favour in [easing?] my Lord Lumley's payment to her Majesty, wherein we [shall?] all give your Lordship thanks, and you shall do me as great an honour herein as a profit if it had been to myself, in that through your Lordship's favour I shall be able to pleasure my friend and stand needless of others that have forsaken me.  Thus, for that your Lordship is troubled with many matters where you are, I crave pardon for troubling you.

DE_VERE_No.31:
It is not unknown to your Lordship that I have entered into a great number of bonds to such as have purchased lands of me, to discharge them of all encumbrances, and because I stand indebted unto her Majesty (as your Lordship knoweth), many of the said purchasers do greatly fear some trouble likely to fall upon them by reason of her Majesty's said debt, & especially if the lands of the Lord Darcy and Sir William Waldegrave should be extended for the same, who have two several statutes of great sums for their discharge.  Whereupon many of the said purchasers have been suitors unto me to procure the discharging of her Majesty's said debt, and do seem very willing to bear the burden thereof if by my means the same might be stalled payable at some convenient days. 
 
I have therefore thought good to acquaint your Lordship with this their suit, requiring most earnestly your Lordship's furtherance in this behalf, whereby I shall be unburdened of a great care which I have for the saving of my honour, and shall by this means also unburden my wife's jointure of that charge which might happen hereafter to be imposed upon the same if God should call your Lordship and me away before her. 

My Lord, this other day your man Stainner(?) told me that you sent for Amice, my man, and if he were absent, that Lyly should come unto you.  I sent Amice, for he was in the way.  And I think very strange that your Lordship should enter into that course towards me whereby I must learn that I knew not before, both of your opinion and goodwill towards me.  But I pray, my Lord, leave that course, for I mean not to be your ward nor your child.  I serve her Majesty, and I am that I am, and by alliance near to your Lordship, but free, and scorn to be offered that injury to think I am so weak of government as to be ruled by servants, or not able to govern myself.  If your Lordship take and follow this course, you deceive yourself and make me take another course than yet I have not thought of.  Wherefore these shall be to desire your Lordship, if that I may make account of your friendship, that you will leave that course, as hurtful to us both.
 
DE_VERE_No.32:
My very good Lord.  As I have been beholding unto you divers times, & of late by my brother Robert Cecil, whereby I have been the better able to follow my suit wherein I have some comfort at this time from Mr Secretary Walsingham, so am I now bold to crave your Lordship's help at this present, for being now almost at a point to taste that good which her Majesty shall determine, yet am I one that hath long besieged a fort, and not able to compass the end or reap the fruit of his travail, being forced to levy his siege for want of munition.  Being therefore thus disfurnished and unprovided to follow her Majesty as I perceive she will look for, I most earnestly desire your Lordship that you will lend me 200 pounds till her Majesty performeth her promise, out of which I shall make my payment, if it please you, with the rest that your Lordship hath at sundry times to my great furtherance and help in my causes sent me by your servant and steward Billet. 
 
I would be loath to have troubled your Lordship with so much if I were not kept here back with this tedious suit from London, where I would have found means to have taken up so much to have served my turn till her Majesty had dispatched me, but for that I dare not (having been here so long, and the matter growing to some conclusion) be absent. 
 
I pray your Lordship bear with me, that at this time wherein I am to set myself in order I do become so troublesome.  From the court this morning. 

DE_VERE_No.33:
My very good Lord, where I mortgaged my lease of Aveley to Mr Herdson, and not as yet redeemed, and now, as well for the supply of my present wants as also to have some three hundred pounds of ready money to redeem certain leases at Hedingham which were gotten from me very unreasonably for divers years yet enduring, and are of as good clear yearly value as my said lease of Aveley is, I therefore most earnestly desire your Lordship to signify your liking to me in writing to dispose of the said lease at my pleasure; otherwise, there is not any will deal with me for the same nor for any part thereof, wherein I shall be greatly beholding to your Lordship, as I am in all the rest of my whole estate.  The 5th of August. 

DE_VERE_No.34:
I would have been with your Lordship before this but that I have not had my health.  Nevertheless, Hampton being returned from the country, I have sent him to your Lordship that he may advertise you of his proceedings there. 
 
At Oatlands I think your Lordship remembers a complaint of [  ] Bellingham's son of his mother's putting forth of the castle, which was before anything done, whereupon your Lordship directed a letter unto the sheriff, [  ] whereof, as it seems, Thomas Hampton had dealt with more favour towards her than the letters unto the sheriff imported.  Notwithstanding, I understand Bellingham is gone to the court, encouraged I know not by what friends, to complain, as he did report here in town, not to your Lordship, but to her Majesty's self.  My Lord, it was ever meant that he should have consideration as reason and conscience might afford him.  But sithence he taketh a violent course and refuseth reasonable offers I have sent Hampton to inform your Lordship the state of the man, who hath received heretofore a pardon for three burglaries and stands bound to the good behaviour, which behaviour, for sundry and manifest breaches thereof which I can prove, he hath lost the benefit of his pardon, whereby as lord of the manor by escheat I am to deal with him as he hath given me occasion, and herein I hope her Majesty will have consideration sith the same case hath been seen once in Henry the Seventh's time and one example in this, her Majesty's.  For those things which falls to me by escheat I do not doubt that her Majesty will, against her law, give any ear, or hearken to such wrongful complaint. 
 
Skinner hath been often with me for a composition, upon what points(?) of law Hampton is to inform your Lordship, referring myself wholly to your Lordship who in all my causes I find mine honourable good Lord, and to deal more fatherly than friendly with me, for the which I do acknowledge, and ever will, myself in most especial wise bound. 
 
And whereas there is a lease in Arthur Milles hand of the manor and lands of Lavenham, I desire your Lordship to cause him to make over his trust unto my servant Mynne, to whom the other lease is made. 
 
If there be complaints made unto your Lordship (as I doubt not but that there will) against the proceedings of mine officers, I most earnestly desire that there may be some reasonable time appointed for the answering of them because my counsel is not in town, but shall be before or at the beginning of the term to satisfice your Lordship and answer their particular complaints.  London, this 8th of September. 
 

DE_VERE_No.35:
My Lord, I do thank your Lordship for the punishment of Hampton, whose evil dealings towards me, being put in trust with my causes in law, I hope your Lordship will think them sufficient to deserve your disgrace, especially knowing his corruptions, which for the more assured knowledge of your Lordship I have sent unto the parties themselves from whom he hath drawn money to his own behoof, whose confirmations, so soon as they can be brought out of the country, they shall be delivered to your Lordship. 
 
In the mean season I shall most heartily pray your Lordship to persevere in your good favour towards me whereby I may procure redress against this which Amyce hath passed under the great seal by the practice of Hampton's fraudulent devise, as shall appear (if I may have leisure to manifest the same) every day more and more.  The changing of the name of my servant without my privity, and putting in another in trust for himself (as bad, as I understand, as himself), if your Lordship will, may give your Lordship certain knowledge of the deceit.  The cozening of so many tenants of their money and the forfeiting of my lease of Skinner's land do witness enough his corruption.  I know if your Lordship will stand mine honourable good Lord and friend herein by handling this Hampton roughly, and this Amyce so that he be but put in fear, that you may bring them to that order which is reason, that I may enjoy mine own lands, as from the beginning was meant by her Majesty.  And as for this letter of Amyce's which I have returned to your Lordship, both concerning my messages to him and the dealing of my servant, as he reports is most false, wherefore I will refer all to your Lordship, who knows the intent of her Majesty's first meaning to me was far otherwise in the beginning when with this suit of mine she thought to recompense me in some sort for forbearing my suit for the Forest, and can judge how unfaithfully I am dealt withal by these parties. 
 
Which favour if your Lordship shall do for me, then would I gladly break unto your Lordship another matter which I would have done ere this had I not been intercepted by these unlooked for troubles.  And this it is. 
 
Whereas I have heard her Majesty meant to sell unto one Middleton, a merchant, and one Carmarden the demesnes of Denbigh which as I am informed is 230 by yearly rent now as it is, I would be an humble suitor to her Majesty that I might have had this bargain, paying the 8000 as they should have done, accepting for 5000 thereof the pension which she hath given me in the Exchequer, and the other 3000 the next term, or upon such reasonable days as her Majesty would grant me by her favour.

BACON_No.1:
What is truth? said jesting Pilate;[42] and would not stay for an
answer. Certainly, there be that delight in giddiness; and count it
a bondage to fix a belief; affecting freewill in thinking as well as
in acting. And though the sects of philosophers of that kind be gone,
yet there remain certain discoursing wits which are of the same veins,
though there be not so much blood in them as was in those of the
ancients. But it is not only the difficulty and labor which men take in
finding out of truth: nor again, that, when it is found, it imposeth
upon mens thoughts, that doth bring lies in favor; but a natural
though corrupt love of the lie itself. One of the later schools[43] of
the Grecians examineth the matter, and is at a stand to think what
should be in it that men should love lies; where neither they make
for pleasure, as with poets; nor for advantage, as with the merchant,
but for the lies sake. But I cannot tell; this same truth is a naked
and open daylight, that doth not show the masks, and mummeries, and
triumphs of the world, half so stately and daintily as candle-lights.
Truth may perhaps come to the price of a pearl, that showeth best by
day, but it will not rise to the price of a diamond or carbuncle,
that showeth best in varied lights. A mixture of a lie doth ever add
pleasure. Doth any man doubt, that if there were taken out of mens
minds vain opinions, flattering hopes, false valuations, imaginations
as one would, and the like, but it would leave the minds of a number
of men poor shrunken things, full of melancholy and indisposition, and
unpleasing to themselves? One of the fathers,[44] in great severity,
called poesy vinum dmonum,[45] because it filleth the imagination,
and yet it is but with the shadow of a lie. But it is not the lie that
passeth through the mind, but the lie that sinketh in, and settleth
in it, that doth the hurt, such as we spake of before. But howsoever
these things are thus in mens depraved judgments and affections, yet
truth, which only doth judge itself, teacheth that the inquiry of
truth, which is the love-making, or wooing of it, the knowledge of
truth, which is the presence of it, and the belief of truth, which
is the enjoying of it, is the sovereign good of human nature. The
first creature of God, in the works of the days, was the light of the
sense;[46] the last was the light of reason;[47] and his sabbath work,
ever since, is the illumination of his Spirit. First, he breathed light
upon the face of the matter, or chaos; then he breathed light into
the face of man; and still he breatheth and inspireth light into the
face of his chosen. The poet[48] that beautified the sect,[49] that
was otherwise inferior to the rest, saith yet excellently well: It
is a pleasure to stand upon the shore, and to see ships tossed upon
the sea; a pleasure to stand in the window of a castle, and to see a
battle, and the adventures thereof below; but no pleasure is comparable
to the standing upon the vantage-ground of truth (a hill not to be
commanded, and where the air is always clear and serene), and to
see the errors, and wanderings, and mists, and tempests, in the vale
below;[50] so always that this prospect be with pity, and not with
swelling or pride. Certainly it is heaven upon earth, to have a mans
mind move in charity, rest in providence, and turn upon the poles of
truth.

To pass from theological and philosophical truth to the truth of civil
business; it will be acknowledged, even by those that practise it not,
that clear and round dealing is the honor of mans nature, and that
mixture of falsehood is like alloy in coin of gold and silver, which
may make the metal work the better, but it embaseth it. For these
winding and crooked courses are the goings of the serpent; which goeth
basely upon the belly, and not upon the feet. There is no vice that
doth so cover a man with shame, as to be found false and perfidious;
and therefore Montaigne[51] saith prettily, when he inquired the
reason why the word of the lie should be such a disgrace, and such an
odious charge: saith he, If it be well weighed, to say that a man
lieth, is as much as to say that he is brave towards God and a coward
towards men. For a lie faces God, and shrinks from man; surely, the
wickedness of falsehood and breach of faith cannot possibly be so
highly expressed, as in that it shall be the last peal to call the
judgments of God upon the generations of men: it being foretold, that,
when Christ cometh, he shall not find faith upon the earth.[52]

BACON_No.2:
Men fear death as children fear to go in the dark; and as that natural
fear in children is increased with tales, so is the other. Certainly,
the contemplation of death, as the wages of sin, and passage to another
world, is holy and religious; but the fear of it, as a tribute due
unto nature, is weak. Yet in religious meditations there is sometimes
mixture of vanity and of superstition. You shall read in some of the
friars books of mortification, that a man should think with himself,
what the pain is, if he have but his fingers end pressed or tortured;
and thereby imagine what the pains of death are, when the whole body
is corrupted and dissolved; when many times death passeth with less
pain than the torture of a limb, for the most vital parts are not
the quickest of sense. And by him that spake only as a philosopher
and natural man, it was well said, Pompa mortis magis terret, quam
mors ipsa.[54] Groans and convulsions, and a discolored face, and
friends weeping, and blacks[55] and obsequies, and the like, show death
terrible. It is worthy the observing, that there is no passion in
the mind of man so weak, but it mates and masters the fear of death;
and therefore death is no such terrible enemy when a man hath so many
attendants about him that can win the combat of him. Revenge triumphs
over death; love slights it; honor aspireth to it; grief flieth to it;
fear preoccupateth it; nay, we read, after Otho the emperor had slain
himself, pity (which is the tenderest of affections) provoked many
to die out of mere compassion to their sovereign, and as the truest
sort of followers.[56] Nay, Seneca[57] adds niceness and satiety:
Cogita quamdiu eadem feceris; mori velle, non tantum fortis, aut
miser, sed etiam fastidiosus potest.[58] A man would die, though he
were neither valiant nor miserable, only upon a weariness to do the
same thing so oft over and over. It is no less worthy to observe, how
little alteration in good spirits the approaches of death make: for
they appear to be the same men till the last instant. Augustus Csar
died in a compliment: Livia, conjugii nostri memor, vive et vale.[59]
Tiberius in dissimulation, as Tacitus saith of him, Jam Tiberium
vires et corpus, non dissimulatio, deserebant:[60] Vespasian in a
jest, sitting upon the stool,[61] Ut puto Deus fio;[62] Galba with
a sentence, Feri, si ex re sit populi Romani,[63] holding forth
his neck; Septimus Severus in dispatch, Adeste, si quid mihi restat
agendum,[64] and the like. Certainly, the Stoics[65] bestowed too much
cost upon death, and by their great preparations made it appear more
fearful. Better, saith he, qui finem vit extremum inter munera ponit
natur.[66] It is as natural to die as to be born; and to a little
infant, perhaps, the one is as painful as the other. He that dies in
an earnest pursuit, is like one that is wounded in hot blood, who,
for the time, scarce feels the hurt; and therefore a mind fixed and
bent upon somewhat that is good, doth avert the dolors of death; but,
above all, believe it, the sweetest canticle is Nunc dimittis,[67]
when a man hath obtained worthy ends and expectations. Death hath this
also, that it openeth the gate to good fame, and extinguisheth envy:
Extinctus amabitur idem.[68]




BACON_No.3:
Religion being the chief band of human society, it is a happy thing
when itself is well contained within the true band of unity. The
quarrels and divisions about religion were evils unknown to the
heathen. The reason was, because the religion of the heathen consisted
rather in rites and ceremonies, than in any constant belief; for you
may imagine what kind of faith theirs was, when the chief doctors and
fathers of their church were the poets. But the true God hath this
attribute, that he is a jealous God; and therefore his worship and
religion will endure no mixture nor partner. We shall therefore speak
a few words concerning the unity of the church; what are the fruits
thereof; what the bounds; and what the means.

The fruits of unity (next unto the well-pleasing of God, which is all
in all), are two; the one towards those that are without the church,
the other towards those that are within. For the former, it is certain
that heresies and schisms are, of all others, the greatest scandals,
yea, more than corruption of manners; for as in the natural body a
wound or solution of continuity is worse than a corrupt humor, so
in the spiritual; so that nothing doth so much keep men out of the
church, and drive men out of the church, as breach of unity; and
therefore, whensoever it cometh to that pass that one saith, Ecce
in Deserto,[69] another saith, Ecce in penetralibus;[70] that is,
when some men seek Christ in the conventicles of heretics, and others
in an outward face of a church, that voice had need continually to
sound in mens ears, nolite exire, go not out. The doctor of the
Gentiles (the propriety of whose vocation drew him to have a special
care of those without) saith: If a heathen[71] come in, and hear
you speak with several tongues, will he not say that you are mad?
and, certainly, it is little better: when atheists and profane persons
do hear of so many discordant and contrary opinions in religion, it
doth avert them from the church, and maketh them to sit down in the
chair of the scorners.[72] It is but a light thing to be vouched in
so serious a matter, but yet it expresseth well the deformity. There
is a master of scoffing, that, in his catalogue of books of a feigned
library, sets down this title of a book, The Morris-Dance[73] of
Heretics; for, indeed, every sect of them hath a diverse posture, or
cringe, by themselves, which cannot but move derision in worldlings and
depraved politicians, who are apt to contemn holy things.

As for the fruit towards those that are within, it is peace, which
containeth infinite blessings; it establisheth faith; it kindleth
charity; the outward peace of the church distilleth into peace of
conscience, and it turneth the labors of writing and reading of
controversies into treatises of mortification and devotion.

Concerning the bounds of unity, the true placing of them importeth
exceedingly. There appear to be two extremes; for to certain zealots
all speech of pacification is odious. Is it peace, Jehu?What hast
thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me.[74] Peace is not the
matter, but following, and party. Contrariwise, certain Laodiceans[75]
and lukewarm persons think they may accommodate points of religion by
middle ways, and taking part of both, and witty reconcilements, as if
they would make an arbitrament between God and man. Both these extremes
are to be avoided; which will be done if the league of Christians,
penned by our Saviour himself, were in the two cross clauses thereof
soundly and plainly expounded: He that is not with us is against
us;[76] and again, He that is not against us, is with us; that is,
if the points fundamental, and of substance in religion, were truly
discerned and distinguished from points not merely of faith, but of
opinion, order, or good intention. This is a thing may seem to many a
matter trivial, and done already; but if it were done less partially,
it would be embraced more generally.

Of this I may give only this advice, according to my small model.
Men ought to take heed of rending Gods church by two kinds of
controversies; the one is, when the matter of the point controverted is
too small and light, not worth the heat and strife about it, kindled
only by contradiction; for, as it is noted by one of the fathers,
Christs coat indeed had no seam, but the churchs vesture was of
divers colors; whereupon he saith, In veste varietas sit, scissura
non sit,[77] they be two things, unity and uniformity; the other is,
when the matter of the point controverted is great, but it is driven
to an over-great subtilty and obscurity, so that it becometh a thing
rather ingenious than substantial. A man that is of judgment and
understanding shall sometimes hear ignorant men differ, and know well
within himself, that those which so differ mean one thing, and yet
they themselves would never agree; and if it come so to pass in that
distance of judgment, which is between man and man, shall we not think
that God above, that knows the heart, doth not discern that frail men,
in some of their contradictions, intend the same thing, and accepteth
of both? The nature of such controversies is excellently expressed by
St. Paul, in the warning and precept that he giveth concerning the
same: Devita profanas vocum novitates, et oppositiones falsi nominis
scienti.[78] Men create oppositions which are not, and put them
into new terms, so fixed as, whereas the meaning ought to govern the
term, the term in effect governeth the meaning. There be also two
false peaces, or unities; the one, when the peace is grounded but upon
an implicit ignorance; for all colors will agree in the dark; the
other, when it is pieced up upon a direct admission of contraries in
fundamental points; for truth and falsehood, in such things, are like
the iron and clay in the toes of Nebuchadnezzars image;[79] they may
cleave, but they will not incorporate.

Concerning the means of procuring unity, men must beware that, in the
procuring or muniting of religious unity, they do not dissolve and
deface the laws of charity and of human society. There be two swords
amongst Christians, the spiritual and temporal, and both have their due
office and place in the maintenance of religion; but we may not take up
the third sword, which is Mahomets sword,[80] or like unto it; that
is, to propagate religion by wars, or, by sanguinary persecutions, to
force consciences; except it be in cases of overt scandal, blasphemy,
or intermixture of practice against the state; much less to nourish
seditions, to authorize conspiracies and rebellions, to put the sword
into the peoples hands, and the like, tending to the subversion of all
government, which is the ordinance of God; for this is but to dash the
first table against the second, and so to consider men as Christians,
as we forget that they are men. Lucretius the poet, when he beheld
the act of Agamemnon, that could endure the sacrificing of his own
daughter, exclaimed;

  Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum.[81]

What would he have said, if he had known of the massacre in France,[82]
or the powder treason of England?[83] He would have been seven times
more epicure and atheist than he was; for as the temporal sword is
to be drawn with great circumspection in cases of religion, so it
is a thing monstrous to put it into the hands of the common people;
let that be left unto the Anabaptists, and other furies. It was
great blasphemy when the devil said, I will ascend and be like the
Highest;[84] but it is greater blasphemy to personate God, and bring
him in saying, I will descend, and be like the prince of darkness;
and what is it better, to make the cause of religion to descend to
the cruel and execrable actions of murdering princes, butchery of
people, and subversion of states and governments? Surely, this is to
bring down the Holy Ghost, instead of the likeness of a dove, in the
shape of a vulture or raven; and to set out of the bark of a Christian
church a flag of a bark of pirates and assassins; therefore, it is most
necessary that the church by doctrine and decree, princes by their
sword, and all learnings, both Christian and moral, as by their Mercury
rod,[85] do damn and send to hell forever those facts and opinions
tending to the support of the same, as hath been already in good part
done. Surely, in counsels concerning religion, that counsel of the
apostle would be prefixed: Ira hominis non implet justitiam Dei;[86]
and it was a notable observation of a wise father, and no less
ingenuously confessed, that those which held and persuaded pressure of
consciences, were commonly interested therein themselves for their own
ends.




BACON_No.4:
Revenge is a kind of wild justice, which the more mans nature runs
to, the more ought law to weed it out; for as for the first wrong, it
doth but offend the law, but the revenge of that wrong, putteth the
law out of office. Certainly, in taking revenge, a man is but even
with his enemy, but in passing it over, he is superior; for it is a
princes part to pardon; and Solomon, I am sure, saith, It is the
glory of a man to pass by an offence. That which is past is gone and
irrevocable, and wise men have enough to do with things present and
to come; therefore they do but trifle with themselves that labor in
past matters. There is no man doth a wrong for the wrongs sake, but
thereby to purchase himself profit, or pleasure, or honor, or the like;
therefore, why should I be angry with a man for loving himself better
than me? And if any man should do wrong merely out of ill-nature, why,
yet it is but like the thorn or briar, which prick and scratch, because
they can do no other. The most tolerable sort of revenge is for those
wrongs which there is no law to remedy; but then, let a man take heed
the revenge be such as there is no law to punish, else a mans enemy is
still beforehand, and it is two for one. Some, when they take revenge,
are desirous the party should know whence it cometh. This is the more
generous; for the delight seemeth to be not so much in doing the hurt
as in making the party repent; but base and crafty cowards are like
the arrow that flieth in the dark. Cosmus, Duke of Florence,[87] had
a desperate saying against perfidious or neglecting friends, as if
those wrongs were unpardonable. You shall read, saith he, that we
are commanded to forgive our enemies; but you never read that we are
commanded to forgive our friends. But yet the spirit of Job was in a
better tune: Shall we, saith he, take good at Gods hands, and not
be content to take evil also?[88] and so of friends in a proportion.
This is certain, that a man that studieth revenge keeps his own wounds
green, which otherwise would heal and do well. Public revenges[89]
are for the most part fortunate; as that for the death of Csar;[90]
for the death of Pertinax; for the death of Henry the Third of
France;[91] and many more. But in private revenges it is not so; nay,
rather, vindictive persons live the life of witches, who, as they are
mischievous, so end they unfortunate.

BACON_No.5:
It was a high speech of Seneca (after the manner of the Stoics), that
the good things which belong to prosperity are to be wished, but
the good things that belong to adversity are to be admired. (Bona
rerum secundarum optabilia, adversarum mirabilia.)[92] Certainly, if
miracles be the command over nature, they appear most in adversity.
It is yet a higher speech of his than the other (much too high for a
heathen), It is true greatness to have in one the frailty of a man,
and the security of a God. (Vere magnum habere fragilitatem hominis
securitatem Dei.)[93] This would have done better in poesy, where
transcendencies are more allowed, and the poets, indeed, have been
busy with it; for it is, in effect, the thing which is figured in
that strange fiction of the ancient poets,[94] which seemeth not to
be without mystery; nay, and to have some approach to the state of a
Christian, that Hercules, when he went to unbind Prometheus (by whom
human nature is represented), sailed the length of the great ocean in
an earthen pot or pitcher, lively describing Christian resolution,
that saileth in the frail bark of the flesh through the waves of the
world. But to speak in a mean, the virtue of prosperity is temperance,
the virtue of adversity is fortitude, which in morals is the more
heroical virtue. Prosperity is the blessing of the Old Testament,
adversity is the blessing of the New, which carrieth the greater
benediction, and the clearer revelation of Gods favor. Yet even in the
Old Testament, if you listen to Davids harp, you shall hear as many
hearse-like airs[95] as carols; and the pencil of the Holy Ghost hath
labored more in describing the afflictions of Job than the felicities
of Solomon. Prosperity is not without many fears and distastes; and
adversity is not without comforts and hopes. We see, in needleworks and
embroideries, it is more pleasing to have a lively work upon a sad and
solemn ground, than to have a dark and melancholy work upon a lightsome
ground: judge, therefore, of the pleasure of the heart by the pleasure
of the eye. Certainly, virtue is like precious odors, most fragrant
when they are incensed, or crushed; for prosperity doth best discover
vice, but adversity doth best discover virtue.[96]




BACON_No.6:
Dissimulation is but a faint kind of policy, or wisdom; for it asketh
a strong wit and a strong heart to know when to tell truth, and to do
it; therefore it is the weaker sort of politicians that are the great
dissemblers.

Tacitus saith, Livia sorted well with the arts of her husband, and
dissimulation of her son;[97] attributing arts or policy to Augustus,
and dissimulation to Tiberius: and again, when Mucianus encourageth
Vespasian to take arms against Vitellius, he saith, We rise not
against the piercing judgment of Augustus, nor the extreme caution or
closeness of Tiberius.[98] These properties of arts or policy, and
dissimulation or closeness, are indeed habits and faculties several,
and to be distinguished; for if a man have that penetration of judgment
as he can discern what things are to be laid open, and what to be
secreted, and what to be showed at half-lights, and to whom and when
(which indeed are arts of state, and arts of life, as Tacitus well
calleth them), to him a habit of dissimulation is a hinderance and a
poorness. But if a man cannot obtain to that judgment, then it is left
to him generally to be close, and a dissembler; for where a man cannot
choose or vary in particulars, there it is good to take the safest and
wariest way in general, like the going softly by one that cannot well
see. Certainly, the ablest men that ever were, have had all an openness
and frankness of dealing, and a name of certainty and veracity: but
then they were like horses well managed, for they could tell passing
well when to stop or turn; and at such times, when they thought the
case indeed required dissimulation, if then they used it, it came to
pass that the former opinion spread abroad, of their good faith and
clearness of dealing, made them almost invisible.

There be three degrees of this hiding and veiling of a mans self: the
first, closeness, reservation, and secrecy; when a man leaveth himself
without observation, or without hold to be taken, what he is: the
second, dissimulation in the negative; when a man lets fall signs and
arguments, that he is not that he is: and the third, simulation in the
affirmative; when a man industriously and expressly feigns and pretends
to be that he is not.

For the first of these, secrecy, it is indeed the virtue of a
confessor; and assuredly the secret man heareth many confessions; for
who will open himself to a blab or a babbler? But if a man be thought
secret, it inviteth discovery, as the more close air sucketh in the
more open; and, as in confession, the revealing is not for worldly use,
but for the ease of a mans heart, so secret men come to the knowledge
of many things in that kind; while men rather discharge their minds
than impart their minds. In few words, mysteries are due to secrecy.
Besides (to say truth), nakedness is uncomely, as well in mind as
body; and it addeth no small reverence to mens manners and actions,
if they be not altogether open. As for talkers and futile persons,
they are commonly vain and credulous withal; for he that talketh what
he knoweth, will also talk what he knoweth not; therefore set it down,
that a habit of secrecy is both politic and moral: and in this part
it is good that a mans face give his tongue leave to speak; for the
discovery of a mans self by the tracts[99] of his countenance, is a
great weakness and betraying, by how much it is many times more marked
and believed than a mans words.

For the second, which is dissimulation, it followeth many times upon
secrecy by a necessity; so that he that will be secret must be a
dissembler in some degree; for men are too cunning to suffer a man to
keep an indifferent carriage between both, and to be secret, without
swaying the balance on either side. They will so beset a man with
questions, and draw him on, and pick it out of him, that without an
absurd silence, he must show an inclination one way; or if he do not,
they will gather as much by his silence as by his speech. As for
equivocations, or oraculous speeches, they cannot hold out long: so
that no man can be secret, except he give himself a little scope of
dissimulation, which is, as it were, but the skirts or train of secrecy.

But for the third degree, which is simulation and false profession,
that I hold more culpable, and less politic, except it be in great and
rare matters; and, therefore, a general custom of simulation (which is
this last degree) is a vice rising either of a natural falseness, or
fearfulness, or of a mind that hath some main faults; which because a
man must needs disguise, it maketh him practise simulation in other
things, lest his hand should be out of use.

The advantages of simulation and dissimulation are three: first, to
lay asleep opposition, and to surprise; for, where a mans intentions
are published, it is an alarum to call up all that are against them:
the second is, to reserve to a mans self a fair retreat; for if a man
engage himself by a manifest declaration, he must go through or take
a fall: the third is, the better to discover the mind of another; for
to him that opens himself men will hardly show themselves adverse; but
will (fair) let him go on, and turn their freedom of speech to freedom
of thought; and therefore it is a good shrewd proverb of the Spaniard,
Tell a lie, and find a troth;[100] as if there were no way of
discovery but by simulation. There be also three disadvantages to set
it even; the first, that simulation and dissimulation commonly carry
with them a show of fearfulness, which, in any business, doth spoil the
feathers of round flying up to the mark; the second, that it puzzleth
and perplexeth the conceits of many, that, perhaps, would otherwise
coperate with him, and makes a man walk almost alone to his own ends:
the third, and greatest, is, that it depriveth a man of one of the most
principal instruments for action, which is trust and belief. The best
composition and temperature is, to have openness in fame and opinion,
secrecy in habit, dissimulation in seasonable use, and a power to feign
if there be no remedy.




BACON_No.7:
The joys of parents are secret, and so are their griefs and fears;
they cannot utter the one, nor they will not utter the other. Children
sweeten labors, but they make misfortunes more bitter; they increase
the cares of life, but they mitigate the remembrance of death. The
perpetuity by generation is common to beasts; but memory, merit, and
noble works, are proper to men: and surely a man shall see the noblest
works and foundations have proceeded from childless men, which have
sought to express the images of their minds where those of their bodies
have failed; so the care of posterity is most in them that have no
posterity. They that are the first raisers of their houses are most
indulgent towards their children, beholding them as the continuance,
not only of their kind, but of their work; and so both children and
creatures.

The difference in affection of parents towards their several children
is many times unequal, and sometimes unworthy, especially in the
mother; as Solomon saith, A wise son rejoiceth the father, but an
ungracious son shames the mother.[101] A man shall see, where there
is a house full of children, one or two of the eldest respected, and
the youngest made wantons;[102] but in the midst some that are, as
it were, forgotten, who many times, nevertheless, prove the best.
The illiberality of parents, in allowance towards their children, is
a harmful error, makes them base, acquaints them with shifts, makes
them sort with mean company, and makes them surfeit more when they
come to plenty; and, therefore, the proof[103] is best when men keep
their authority towards their children, but not their purse. Men have
a foolish manner (both parents, and schoolmasters, and servants), in
creating and breeding an emulation between brothers during childhood,
which many times sorteth[104] to discord when they are men, and
disturbeth families.[105] The Italians make little difference between
children and nephews, or near kinsfolk; but so they be of the lump,
they care not, though they pass not through their own body; and, to
say truth, in nature it is much a like matter; insomuch that we see a
nephew sometimes resembleth an uncle or a kinsman more than his own
parent, as the blood happens. Let parents choose betimes the vocations
and courses they mean their children should take, for then they are
most flexible; and let them not too much apply themselves to the
disposition of their children, as thinking they will take best to that
which they have most mind to. It is true, that if the affection or
aptness of the children be extraordinary, then it is good not to cross
it; but generally the precept is good, Optimum elige, suave et facile
illud faciet consuetudo.[106]Younger brothers are commonly fortunate,
but seldom or never where the elder are disinherited.




BACON_No.8:
He that hath wife and children hath given hostages to fortune; for
they are impediments to great enterprises, either of virtue or
mischief. Certainly the best works, and of greatest merit for the
public, have proceeded from the unmarried or childless men, which,
both in affection and means, have married and endowed the public.
Yet it were great reason that those that have children should have
greatest care of future times, unto which they know they must transmit
their dearest pledges. Some there are who, though they lead a single
life, yet their thoughts do end with themselves, and account future
times impertinences; nay, there are some other that account wife and
children but as bills of charges; nay more, there are some foolish,
rich, covetous men, that take a pride in having no children, because
they may be thought so much the richer; for, perhaps they have heard
some talk, Such an one is a great rich man, and another except to
it, Yea, but he hath a great charge of children; as if it were an
abatement to his riches. But the most ordinary cause of a single life
is liberty, especially in certain self-pleasing and humorous minds,
which are so sensible of every restraint, as they will go near to
think their girdles and garters to be bonds and shackles. Unmarried
men are best friends, best masters, best servants; but not always best
subjects, for they are light to run away, and almost all fugitives are
of that condition. A single life doth well with churchmen, for charity
will hardly water the ground where it must first fill a pool.[107]
It is indifferent for judges and magistrates; for if they be facile
and corrupt, you shall have a servant five times worse than a wife.
For soldiers, I find the generals commonly, in their hortatives, put
men in mind of their wives and children; and I think the despising
of marriage amongst the Turks maketh the vulgar soldier more base.
Certainly, wife and children are a kind of discipline of humanity; and
single men, though they be many times more charitable, because their
means are less exhaust, yet, on the other side, they are more cruel
and hard-hearted (good to make severe inquisitors), because their
tenderness is not so oft called upon. Grave natures, led by custom,
and therefore constant, are commonly loving husbands, as was said of
Ulysses, Vetulam suam praetulit immortalitati.[108] Chaste women are
often proud and froward, as presuming upon the merit of their chastity.
It is one of the best bonds, both of chastity and obedience, in the
wife, if she think her husband wise, which she will never do if she
find him jealous. Wives are young mens mistresses, companions for
middle age, and old mens nurses, so as a man may have a quarrel[109]
to marry when he will; but yet he was reputed one of the wise men that
made answer to the question when a man should marry, A young man not
yet, an elder man not at all.[110] It is often seen that bad husbands
have very good wives; whether it be that it raiseth the price of their
husbands kindness when it comes, or that the wives take a pride in
their patience; but this never fails, if the bad husbands were of their
own choosing, against their friends consent, for then they will be
sure to make good their own folly.




BACON_No.9:
There be none of the affections which have been noted to fascinate or
bewitch, but love and envy. They both have vehement wishes; they frame
themselves readily into imaginations and suggestions, and they come
easily into the eye, especially upon the presence of the objects which
are the points that conduce to fascination, if any such thing there
be. We see, likewise, the Scripture calleth envy an evil eye;[111] and
the astrologers call the evil influences of the stars evil aspects;
so that still there seemeth to be acknowledged, in the act of envy, an
ejaculation, or irradiation of the eye; nay, some have been so curious
as to note that the times, when the stroke or percussion of an envious
eye doth most hurt, are, when the party envied is beheld in glory or
triumph, for that sets an edge upon envy; and besides, at such times,
the spirits of the person envied do come forth most into the outward
parts, and so meet the blow.

But, leaving these curiosities (though not unworthy to be thought on
in fit place), we will handle what persons are apt to envy others;
what persons are most subject to be envied themselves; and what is the
difference between public and private envy.

A man that hath no virtue in himself, ever envieth virtue in others;
for mens minds will either feed upon their own good, or upon others
evil; and who wanteth the one will prey upon the other; and whoso is
out of hope to attain to anothers virtue, will seek to come at even
hand[112] by depressing anothers fortune.

A man that is busy and inquisitive, is commonly envious; for to know
much of other mens matters cannot be, because all that ado may concern
his own estate; therefore, it must needs be that he taketh a kind of
play-pleasure in looking upon the fortunes of others; neither can he
that mindeth but his own business find much matter for envy; for envy
is a gadding passion, and walketh the streets, and doth not keep home:
Non est curiosus, quin idem sit malevolus.[113]

Men of noble birth are noted to be envious towards new men when they
rise, for the distance is altered; and it is like a deceit of the eye,
that when others come on they think themselves go back.

Deformed persons and eunuchs, and old men and bastards, are envious;
for he that cannot possibly mend his own case, will do what he can to
impair anothers; except these defects light upon a very brave and
heroical nature, which thinketh to make his natural wants part of his
honor; in that it should be said, That a eunuch, or a lame man, did
such great matters, affecting the honor of a miracle; as it was in
Narses[114] the eunuch, and Agesilaus and Tamerlane,[115] that were
lame men.

The same is the case of men that rise after calamities and
misfortunes; for they are as men fallen out with the times, and think
other mens harms a redemption of their own sufferings.

They that desire to excel in too many matters, out of levity and
vainglory, are ever envious, for they cannot want work; it being
impossible but many, in some one of those things, should surpass them;
which was the character of Adrian the emperor, that mortally envied
poets and painters, and artificers in works, wherein he had a vein to
excel.[116]

Lastly, near kinsfolk and fellows in office, and those that have been
bred together, are more apt to envy their equals when they are raised;
for it doth upbraid unto them their own fortunes, and pointeth at them,
and cometh oftener into their remembrance, and incurreth likewise more
into the note[117] of others; and envy ever redoubleth from speech and
fame. Cains envy was the more vile and malignant towards his brother
Abel, because when his sacrifice was better accepted, there was nobody
to look on. Thus much for those that are apt to envy.

Concerning those that are more or less subject to envy: First, persons
of eminent virtue, when they are advanced, are less envied, for their
fortune seemeth but due unto them; and no man envieth the payment of
a debt, but rewards and liberality rather. Again, envy is ever joined
with the comparing of a mans self; and where there is no comparison,
no envy; and therefore kings are not envied but by kings. Nevertheless,
it is to be noted, that unworthy persons are most envied at their first
coming in, and afterwards overcome it better; whereas, contrariwise,
persons of worth and merit are most envied when their fortune
continueth long; for by that time, though their virtue be the same, yet
it hath not the same lustre; for fresh men grow up that darken it.

Persons of noble blood are less envied in their rising; for it seemeth
but right done to their birth: besides, there seemeth not so much added
to their fortune; and envy is as the sunbeams, that beat hotter upon
a bank or steep rising ground, than upon a flat; and, for the same
reason, those that are advanced by degrees are less envied than those
that are advanced suddenly, and _per saltum_.[118]

Those that have joined with their honor great travels, cares, or
perils, are less subject to envy; for men think that they earn their
honors hardly, and pity them sometimes, and pity ever healeth envy.
Wherefore you shall observe, that the more deep and sober sort of
politic persons, in their greatness, are ever bemoaning themselves
what a life they lead, chanting a _quanta patimur_;[119] not that they
feel it so, but only to abate the edge of envy; but this is to be
understood of business that is laid upon men, and not such as they call
unto themselves; for nothing increaseth envy more than an unnecessary
and ambitious engrossing of business; and nothing doth extinguish envy
more than for a great person to preserve all other inferior officers in
their full rights and preminences of their places; for, by that means,
there be so many screens between him and envy.

Above all, those are most subject to envy, which carry the greatness
of their fortunes in an insolent and proud manner; being never well
but while they are showing how great they are, either by outward pomp,
or by triumphing over all opposition or competition. Whereas wise men
will rather do sacrifice to envy, in suffering themselves, sometimes of
purpose, to be crossed and overborne in things that do not much concern
them. Notwithstanding, so much is true, that the carriage of greatness
in a plain and open manner (so it be without arrogancy and vainglory),
doth draw less envy than if it be in a more crafty and cunning fashion;
for in that course a man doth but disavow fortune, and seemeth to be
conscious of his own want in worth, and doth but teach others to envy
him.

Lastly, to conclude this part, as we said in the beginning that the
act of envy had somewhat in it of witchcraft, so there is no other
cure of envy but the cure of witchcraft; and that is, to remove the
lot (as they call it), and to lay it upon another; for which purpose,
the wiser sort of great persons bring in ever upon the stage somebody
upon whom to derive the envy that would come upon themselves; sometimes
upon ministers and servants, sometimes upon colleagues and associates,
and the like; and, for that turn, there are never wanting some persons
of violent and undertaking natures, who, so they may have power and
business, will take it at any cost.

Now, to speak of public envy: there is yet some good in public
envy, whereas in private there is none; for public envy is as an
ostracism,[120] that eclipseth men when they grow too great; and
therefore it is a bridle also to great ones, to keep them within bounds.

This envy, being in the Latin word _invidia_,[121] goeth in the modern
languages by the name of discontentment, of which we shall speak in
handling sedition. It is a disease in a state like to infection; for as
infection spreadeth upon that which is sound, and tainteth it, so, when
envy is gotten once into a state, it traduceth even the best actions
thereof, and turneth them into an ill odor; and therefore there is
little won by intermingling of plausible actions; for that doth argue
but a weakness and fear of envy, which hurteth so much the more, as it
is likewise usual in infections, which, if you fear them, you call them
upon you.

This public envy seemeth to beat chiefly upon principal officers or
ministers, rather than upon kings and estates themselves. But this is a
sure rule, that if the envy upon the minister be great, when the cause
of it in him is small; or if the envy be general in a manner upon all
the ministers of an estate, then the envy (though hidden) is truly upon
the state itself. And so much of public envy or discontentment, and the
difference thereof from private envy, which was handled in the first
place.

We will add this in general, touching the affection of envy, that,
of all other affections, it is the most importune and continual; for
of other affections there is occasion given but now and then; and
therefore it was well said, Invidia festos dies non agit:[122] for
it is ever working upon some or other. And it is also noted, that love
and envy do make a man pine, which other affections do not, because
they are not so continual. It is also the vilest affection, and the
most depraved; for which cause it is the proper attribute of the devil,
who is called The envious man, that soweth tares amongst the wheat by
night;[123] as it always cometh to pass that envy worketh subtilely,
and in the dark, and to the prejudice of good things, such as is the
wheat.




BACON_No.10:
The stage is more beholding[124] to love than the life of man; for as
to the stage, love is ever matter of comedies, and now and then of
tragedies; but in life it doth much mischief, sometimes like a Siren,
sometimes like a Fury. You may observe, that, amongst all the great
and worthy persons (whereof the memory remaineth, either ancient or
recent), there is not one that hath been transported to the mad degree
of love, which shows that great spirits and great business do keep out
this weak passion. You must except, nevertheless, Marcus Antonius,
the half partner of the empire of Rome, and Appius Claudius,[125] the
decemvir and lawgiver; whereof the former was indeed a voluptuous
man, and inordinate, but the latter was an austere and wise man; and
therefore it seems (though rarely) that love can find entrance, not
only into an open heart, but also into a heart well fortified, if watch
be not well kept. It is a poor saying of Epicurus, Satis magnum alter
alteri theatrum sumus;[126] as if man, made for the contemplation
of heaven and all noble objects, should do nothing but kneel before
a little idol, and make himself subject, though not of the mouth (as
beasts are) yet of the eye, which was given him for higher purposes.
It is a strange thing to note the excess of this passion, and how it
braves the nature and value of things, by this, that the speaking in
a perpetual hyperbole is comely in nothing but in love, neither is it
merely in the phrase; for whereas it hath been well said, That the
arch flatterer, with whom all the petty flatterers have intelligence,
is a mans self; certainly, the lover is more; for there was never
proud man thought so absurdly well of himself as the lover doth of the
person loved; and therefore it was well said, That it is impossible
to love and to be wise.[127] Neither doth this weakness appear to
others only, and not to the party loved, but to the loved most of
all, except the love be reciprocal; for it is a true rule, that love
is ever rewarded, either with the reciprocal, or with an inward and
secret contempt; by how much the more men ought to beware of this
passion, which loseth not only other things, but itself. As for the
other losses, the poets relation[128] doth well figure them: That
he that preferred Helena, quitted the gifts of Juno and Pallas; for
whosoever esteemeth too much of amorous affection, quitteth both riches
and wisdom. This passion hath his floods in the very times of weakness,
which are, great prosperity and great adversity, though this latter
hath been less observed; both which times kindle love, and make it more
fervent, and therefore show it to be the child of folly. They do best
who, if they cannot but admit love, yet make it keep quarter, and sever
it wholly from their serious affairs and actions of life; for if it
check once with business, it troubleth mens fortunes, and maketh men
that they can nowise be true to their own ends. I know not how, but
martial men are given to love; I think it is, but as they are given
to wine, for perils commonly ask to be paid in pleasures. There is in
mans nature a secret inclination and motion towards love of others,
which, if it be not spent upon some one or a few, doth naturally spread
itself towards many, and maketh men become humane and charitable, as it
is seen sometimes in friars. Nuptial love maketh mankind, friendly love
perfecteth it, but wanton love corrupted and embaseth it.




BACON_No.11:
Men in great place are thrice servantsservants of the sovereign or
state, servants of fame, and servants of business; so as they have no
freedom, neither in their persons, nor in their actions, nor in their
times. It is a strange desire to seek power and to lose liberty; or to
seek power over others, and to lose power over a mans self. The rising
unto place is laborious, and by pains men come to greater pains; and
it is sometimes base, and by indignities men come to dignities. The
standing is slippery, and the regress is either a downfall, or at least
an eclipse, which is a melancholy thing: Cum non sis qui fueris, non
esse cur velis vivere.[130] Nay, retire men cannot when they would,
neither will they when it were reason; but are impatient of privateness
even in age and sickness, which require the shadow; like old townsmen,
that will be still sitting at their street door, though thereby they
offer age to scorn. Certainly, great persons had need to borrow other
mens opinions to think themselves happy; for if they judge by their
own feeling, they cannot find it; but if they think with themselves
what other men think of them, and that other men would fain be as they
are, then they are happy as it were by report, when, perhaps, they
find the contrary within; for they are the first that find their own
griefs, though they be the last that find their own faults. Certainly,
men in great fortunes are strangers to themselves, and while they are
in the puzzle of business, they have no time to tend their health
either of body or mind.

  Illi mors gravis incubat,
  Qui notus nimis omnibus,
  Ignotus moritur.[131]

In place, there is license to do good and evil, whereof the latter is a
curse; for in evil, the best condition is not to will, the second not
to can. But power to do good is the true and lawful end of aspiring;
for good thoughts, though God accept them, yet towards men are little
better than good dreams, except they be put in act; and that cannot be
without power and place, as the vantage and commanding ground. Merit
and good works are the end of mans motion, and conscience of the same
is the accomplishment of mans rest; for if a man can be partaker
of Gods theatre, he shall likewise be partaker of Gods rest. Et
conversus Deus, ut aspiceret opera, qu fecerunt manus su, vidit quod
omnia essent bona nimis;[132] and then the Sabbath.

In the discharge of thy place, set before thee the best examples; for
imitation is a globe of precepts, and after a time set before thee
thine own example; and examine thyself strictly whether thou didst not
best at first. Neglect not also the examples of those that have carried
themselves ill in the same place; not to set off thyself by taxing
their memory, but to direct thyself what to avoid. Reform, therefore,
without bravery or scandal of former times and persons; but yet set it
down to thyself, as well to create good precedents as to follow them.
Reduce things to the first institution, and observe wherein and how
they have degenerated; but yet ask counsel of both timesof the ancient
time what is best, and of the latter time what is fittest. Seek to make
thy course regular, that men may know beforehand what they may expect;
but be not too positive and peremptory, and express thyself well when
thou digressest from thy rule. Preserve the right of thy place, but
stir not questions of jurisdiction; and rather assume thy right in
silence, and _de facto_,[133] than voice it with claims and challenges.
Preserve likewise the rights of inferior places; and think it more
honor to direct in chief than to be busy in all. Embrace and invite
helps and advices touching the execution of thy place; and do not drive
away such as bring thee information, as meddlers, but accept of them in
good part. The vices of authority are chiefly four: delays, corruption,
roughness, and facility. For delays, give easy access, keep times
appointed, go through with that which is in hand, and interlace not
business but of necessity. For corruption, do not only bind thine own
hands or thy servants hands from taking, but bind the hands of suitors
also from offering; for integrity used doth the one, but integrity
professed, and with a manifest detestation of bribery, doth the other;
and avoid not only the fault, but the suspicion. Whosoever is found
variable, and changeth manifestly without manifest cause, giveth
suspicion of corruption; therefore, always when thou changest thine
opinion or course, profess it plainly, and declare it, together with
the reasons that move thee to change, and do not think to steal it. A
servant or a favorite, if he be inward, and no other apparent cause
of esteem, is commonly thought but a by-way to close corruption. For
roughness, it is a needless cause of discontent: severity breedeth
fear, but roughness breedeth hate. Even reproofs from authority ought
to be grave, and not taunting. As for facility,[134] it is worse than
bribery, for bribes come but now and then; but if importunity or idle
respects[135] lead a man, he shall never be without; as Solomon saith,
To respect persons is not good; for such a man will transgress for a
piece of bread.[136]

It is most true that was anciently spoken: A place showeth the man;
and it showeth some to the better, and some to the worse: Omnium
consensu capax imperii, nisi imperasset,[137] saith Tacitus of Galba;
but of Vespasian he saith, Solus imperantium, Vespasianus mutatus in
melius;[138] though the one was meant of sufficiency, the other of
manners and affection. It is an assured sign of a worthy and generous
spirit, whom honor amends; for honor is, or should be, the place of
virtue; and as in nature things move violently to their place, and
calmly in their place, so virtue in ambition is violent, in authority
settled and calm. All rising to great place is by a winding stair; and
if there be factions, it is good to side a mans self whilst he is in
the rising, and to balance himself when he is placed. Use the memory of
thy predecessor fairly and tenderly; for if thou dost not, it is a debt
will sure be paid when thou art gone. If thou have colleagues, respect
them; and rather call them when they look not for it, than exclude
them when they have reason to look to be called. Be not too sensible
or too remembering of thy place in conversation and private answers
to suitors; but let it rather be said, When he sits in place, he is
another man.




BACON_No.12:
It is a trivial grammar-school text, but yet worthy a wise mans
consideration. Question was asked of Demosthenes, what was the chief
part of an orator? He answered, Action. What next?Action. What next
again?Action.[139] He said it that knew it best, and had, by nature,
himself no advantage in that he commended. A strange thing, that that
part of an orator which is but superficial, and rather the virtue
of a player, should be placed so high above those other noble parts
of invention, elocution, and the rest; nay, almost alone, as if it
were all in all. But the reason is plain. There is in human nature
generally more of the fool than of the wise; and therefore, those
faculties by which the foolish part of mens minds is taken are most
potent. Wonderful like is the case of boldness in civil business. What
first?Boldness: what second and third?Boldness. And yet boldness is
a child of ignorance and baseness, far inferior to other parts; but,
nevertheless, it doth fascinate, and bind hand and foot those that are
either shallow in judgment or weak in courage, which are the greatest
part, yea, and prevaileth with wise man at weak times; therefore,
we see it hath done wonders in popular states, but with senates and
princes less, and more, ever upon the first entrance of bold persons
into action than soon after; for boldness is an ill keeper of
promise. Surely, as there are mountebanks for the natural body, so
are there mountebanks for the politic body; men that undertake great
cures, and perhaps have been lucky in two or three experiments, but
want the grounds of science, and therefore cannot hold out; nay, you
shall see a bold fellow many times do Mahomets miracle. Mahomet made
the people believe that he would call a hill to him, and from the top
of it offer up his prayers for the observers of his law. The people
assembled; Mahomet called the hill to come to him again and again;
and when the hill stood still, he was never a whit abashed, but said,
If the hill will not come to Mahomet, Mahomet will go to the hill.
So these men, when they have promised great matters and failed most
shamefully, yet, if they have the perfection of boldness, they will
but slight it over, and make a turn, and no more ado. Certainly, to
men of great judgment, bold persons are a sport to behold; nay, and
to the vulgar also boldness hath somewhat of the ridiculous; for if
absurdity be the subject of laughter, doubt you not but great boldness
is seldom without some absurdity; especially it is a sport to see when
a bold fellow is out of countenance, for that puts his face into a most
shrunken and wooden posture, as needs it must; for in bashfulness the
spirits do a little go and come, but with bold men, upon like occasion,
they stand at a stay; like a stale at chess, where it is no mate, but
yet the game cannot stir; but this last were fitter for a satire than
for a serious observation. This is well to be weighed, that boldness
is ever blind, for it seeth not dangers and inconveniences; therefore,
it is ill in counsel, good in execution; so that the right use of bold
persons is, that they never command in chief, but be seconds and under
the direction of others; for in counsel it is good to see dangers; and
in execution not to see them except they be very great.

BACON_No.13:


I take goodness in this sense, the affecting of the weal of men, which
is that the Grecians call philanthropia; and the word humanity, as
it is used, is a little too light to express it. Goodness I call the
habit, and goodness of nature the inclination. This, of all virtues
and dignities of the mind, is the greatest, being the character of
the Deity; and without it man is a busy, mischievous, wretched thing,
no better than a kind of vermin. Goodness answers to the theological
virtue charity, and admits no excess but error. The desire of power
in excess caused the angels to fall;[140] the desire of knowledge in
excess caused man to fall; but in charity there is no excess, neither
can angel or man come in danger by it. The inclination to goodness is
imprinted deeply in the nature of man, insomuch that if it issue not
towards men, it will take unto other living creatures; as it is seen
in the Turks, a cruel people, who nevertheless are kind to beasts, and
give alms to dogs and birds; insomuch, as Busbechius[141] reporteth,
a Christian boy in Constantinople had like to have been stoned for
gagging in a waggishness a longbilled fowl.[142] Errors, indeed, in
this virtue, of goodness or charity, may be committed. The Italians
have an ungracious proverb: Tanto buon che val niente; So good, that
he is good for nothing; and one of the doctors of Italy, Nicholas
Machiavel,[143] had the confidence to put in writing, almost in plain
terms, That the Christian faith had given up good men in prey to those
that are tyrannical and unjust;[144] which he spake, because, indeed,
there was never law, or sect, or opinion did so much magnify goodness
as the Christian religion doth; therefore, to avoid the scandal and the
danger both, it is good to take knowledge of the errors of a habit so
excellent. Seek the good of other men, but be not in bondage to their
faces or fancies; for that is but facility or softness, which taketh an
honest mind prisoner. Neither give thou sops cock a gem, who would
be better pleased and happier if he had had a barleycorn. The example
of God teacheth the lesson truly: He sendeth his rain, and maketh his
sun to shine upon the just and the unjust;[145] but he doth not rain
wealth, nor shine honor and virtues upon men equally; common benefits
are to be communicate with all, but peculiar benefits with choice. And
beware how, in making the portraiture, thou breakest the pattern; for
divinity maketh the love of ourselves the pattern, the love of our
neighbors but the portraiture: Sell all thou hast, and give it to the
poor, and follow me;[146] but sell not all thou hast, except thou
come and follow me; that is, except thou have a vocation wherein thou
mayest do as much good with little means as with great; for otherwise,
in feeding the streams thou driest the fountain. Neither is there only
a habit of goodness directed by right reason, but there is in some men,
even in nature, a disposition towards it; as, on the other side, there
is a natural malignity, for there be that in their nature do not affect
the good of others. The lighter sort of malignity turneth but to a
crossness, or frowardness, or aptness to oppose, or difficileness, or
the like; but the deeper sort to envy, and mere mischief. Such men in
other mens calamities are, as it were, in season, and are ever on the
loading part; not so good as the dogs that licked Lazaruss sores,[147]
but like flies that are still buzzing upon any thing that is raw;
misanthropi, that make it their practice to bring men to the bough, and
yet have never a tree for the purpose in their gardens, as Timon[148]
had. Such dispositions are the very errors of human nature, and yet
they are the fittest timber to make great politics of; like to knee
timber,[149] that is good for ships that are ordained to be tossed, but
not for building houses that shall stand firm. The parts and signs of
goodness are many. If a man be gracious and courteous to strangers, it
shows he is a citizen of the world, and that his heart is no island
cut off from other lands, but a continent that joins to them; if he
be compassionate towards the afflictions of others, it shows that his
heart is like the noble tree that is wounded itself when it gives the
balm;[150] if he easily pardons and remits offences, it shows that
his mind is planted above injuries, so that he cannot be shot; if he
be thankful for small benefits, it shows that he weighs mens minds,
and not their trash; but, above all, if he have St. Pauls perfection,
that he would wish to be an anathema[151] from Christ for the salvation
of his brethren, it shows much of a divine nature, and a kind of
conformity with Christ himself.




BACON_No.14:


We will speak of nobility, first, as a portion of an estate, then as a
condition of particular persons. A monarchy, where there is no nobility
at all, is ever a pure and absolute tyranny as that of the Turks; for
nobility attempers sovereignty, and draws the eyes of the people
somewhat aside from the line royal: but for democracies they need it
not; and they are commonly more quiet and less subject to sedition than
where there are stirps of nobles; for mens eyes are upon the business,
and not upon the persons; or if upon the persons, it is for the
business sake, as fittest, and not for flags and pedigree. We see the
Switzers last well, notwithstanding their diversity of religion and of
cantons; for utility is their bond, and not respects.[152] The United
Provinces of the Low Countries[153] in their government excel; for
where there is an equality the consultations are more indifferent, and
the payments and tributes more cheerful. A great and potent nobility
addeth majesty to a monarch, but diminisheth power, and putteth life
and spirit into the people, but presseth their fortune. It is well
when nobles are not too great for sovereignty nor for justice; and yet
maintained in that height, as the insolency of inferiors may be broken
upon them, before it come on too fast upon the majesty of kings. A
numerous nobility causeth poverty and inconvenience in a state, for it
is a surcharge of expense; and besides, it being of necessity that many
of the nobility fall in time to be weak in fortune, it maketh a kind of
disproportion between honor and means.

As for nobility in particular persons, it is a reverend thing to
see an ancient castle or building not in decay, or to see a fair
timbertree sound and perfect; how much more to behold an ancient noble
family, which hath stood against the waves and weathers of time! For
new nobility is but the act of power, but ancient nobility is the act
of time. Those that are first raised to nobility are commonly more
virtuous,[154] but less innocent than their descendants; for there is
rarely any rising but by a commixture of good and evil arts; but it
is reason the memory of their virtues remain to their posterity, and
their faults die with themselves. Nobility of birth commonly abateth
industry, and he that is not industrious, envieth him that is; besides,
noble persons cannot go much higher; and he that standeth at a stay
when others rise, can hardly avoid motions of envy.[155] On the other
side, nobility extinguisheth the passive envy from others towards them,
because they are in possession of honor. Certainly, kings that have
able men of their nobility shall find ease in employing them, and a
better slide into their business; for people naturally bend to them, as
born in some sort to command.




BACON_No.15:


Shepherds of people had need know the calendars of tempests in state,
which are commonly greatest when things grow to equality; as natural
tempests are greatest about the equinoctia,[156] and as there are
certain hollow blasts of wind and secret swellings of seas before a
tempest, so are there in states:

            Ille etiam ccos instare tumultus
  Spe monet, fraudesque et operta tumescere bella.[157]

Libels and licentious discourses against the state, when they are
frequent and open; and in like sort false news, often running up and
down, to the disadvantage of the state, and hastily embraced, are
amongst the signs of troubles. Virgil, giving the pedigree of Fame,
saith she was sister to the giants:

  Illam Terra parens, ir irritata Deorum,
  Extremam (ut perhibent) Co Enceladoque sororem
  Progenuit.[158]

As if fames were the relics of seditions past; but they are no less
indeed the preludes of seditions to come. Howsoever, he noteth it
right, that seditious tumults and seditious fames differ no more but
as brother and sister, masculine and feminine; especially if it come
to that, that the best actions of a state, and the most plausible, and
which ought to give greatest contentment, are taken in ill sense, and
traduced; for that shows the envy great, as Tacitus saith, Conflat
magn, invidi, seu bene, seu male, gesta premunt.[159] Neither doth
it follow, that because these fames are a sign of troubles, that
the suppressing of them with too much severity should be a remedy
of troubles; for the despising of them many times checks them best,
and the going about to stop them doth but make a wonder longlived.
Also that kind of obedience, which Tacitus speaketh of, is to be held
suspected: Erant in officio, sed tamen qui mallent imperantium mandata
interpretari, quam exsequi;[160] disputing, excusing, cavilling upon
mandates and directions, is a kind of shaking off the yoke, and assay
of disobedience; especially if, in those disputings, they which are for
the direction speak fearfully and tenderly, and those that are against
it audaciously.

Also, as Machiavel noteth well, when princes, that ought to be
common parents, make themselves as a party, and lean to a side; it
is as a boat that is overthrown by uneven weight on the one side, as
was well seen in the time of Henry the Third of France; for first
himself entered league[161] for the extirpation of the Protestants,
and presently after the same league was turned upon himself; for when
the authority of princes is made but an accessary to a cause, and that
there be other bands that tie faster than the band of sovereignty,
kings begin to be put almost out of possession.

Also, when discords, and quarrels, and factions are carried openly and
audaciously, it is a sign the reverence of government is lost; for the
motions of the greatest persons in a government ought to be as the
motions of the planets under primum mobile,[162] according to the old
opinion, which is, that every of them is carried swiftly by the highest
motion, and softly in their own motion; and therefore, when great
ones in their own particular motion move violently, and as Tacitus
expresseth it well, liberius quam ut imperantium meminissent,[163]
it is a sign the orbs are out of frame; for reverence is that
wherewith princes are girt from God, who threateneth the dissolving
thereof: Solvam cingula regum.[164]

So when any of the four pillars of government are mainly shaken or
weakened (which are religion, justice, counsel, and treasure), men
had need to pray for fair weather. But let us pass from this part of
predictions (concerning which, nevertheless, more light may be taken
from that which followeth), and let us speak first of the materials of
seditions; then of the motives of them; and thirdly of the remedies.

Concerning the materials of seditions, it is a thing well to be
considered, for the surest way to prevent seditions (if the times do
bear it), is to take away the matter of them; for if there be fuel
prepared, it is hard to tell whence the spark shall come that shall
set it on fire. The matter of seditions is of two kinds, much poverty
and much discontentment. It is certain, so many overthrown estates, so
many votes for troubles. Lucan noteth well the state of Rome before the
civil war:

  Hinc usura vorax, rapidumque in tempore fnus,
  Hinc concussa fides, et multis utile bellum.[165]

This same multis utile bellum,[166] is an assured and infallible
sign of a state disposed to seditions and troubles; and if this
poverty and broken estate in the better sort be joined with a want and
necessity in the mean people, the danger is imminent and great; for
the rebellions of the belly are the worst. As for discontentments,
they are in the politic body like to humors in the natural, which are
apt to gather a preternatural heat and to inflame; and let no prince
measure the danger of them by this, whether they be just or unjust;
for that were to imagine people to be too reasonable, who do often
spurn at their own good; nor yet by this, whether the griefs whereupon
they rise be in fact great or small; for they are the most dangerous
discontentments where the fear is greater than the feeling: Dolendi
modus, timendi non item.[167] Besides, in great oppressions, the same
things that provoke the patience, do withal mate[168] the courage;
but in fears it is not so; neither let any prince or state be secure
concerning discontentments, because they have been often or have been
long, and yet no peril hath ensued; for as it is true that every vapor
or fume doth not turn into a storm, so it is nevertheless true that
storms, though they blow over divers times, yet may fall at last; and,
as the Spanish proverb noteth well, The cord breaketh at the last by
the weakest pull.[169]

The causes and motives of seditions are, innovation in religion,
taxes, alteration of laws and customs, breaking of privileges, general
oppression, advancement of unworthy persons, strangers, dearths,
disbanded soldiers, factions grown desperate, and whatsoever in
offending people joineth and knitteth them in a common cause.

For the remedies, there may be some general preservatives, whereof we
will speak; as for the just cure, it must answer to the particular
disease, and so be left to counsel rather than rule.

The first remedy, or prevention, is to remove, by all means possible,
that material cause of sedition whereof we spake, which is, want and
poverty in the estate;[170] to which purpose serveth the opening and
wellbalancing of trade; the cherishing of manufactures; the banishing
of idleness; the repressing of waste and excess by sumptuary laws;[171]
the improvement and husbanding of the soil; the regulating of prices of
things vendible; the moderating of taxes and tributes, and the like.
Generally, it is to be foreseen that the population of a kingdom
(especially if it be not mown down by wars) do not exceed the stock of
the kingdom which should maintain them; neither is the population to
be reckoned only by number; for a smaller number, that spend more and
earn less, do wear out an estate sooner than a greater number that live
lower and gather more. Therefore the multiplying of nobility and other
degrees of quality, in an overproportion to the common people, doth
speedily bring a state to necessity; and so doth likewise an overgrown
clergy, for they bring nothing to the stock;[172] and in like manner,
when more are bred scholars than preferments can take off.

It is likewise to be remembered, that, forasmuch as the increase of any
estate must be upon the foreigner[173] (for whatsoever is somewhere
gotten is somewhere lost), there be but three things which one nation
selleth unto another; the commodity, as nature yieldeth it; the
manufacture; and the vecture, or carriage; so that, if these three
wheels go, wealth will flow as in a spring tide. And it cometh many
times to pass, that, materiam superabit opus,[174] that the work and
carriage is more worth than the material, and enricheth a state more;
as is notably seen in the Low Countrymen, who have the best mines[175]
above ground in the world.

Above all things, good policy is to be used, that the treasure and
moneys in a state be not gathered into few hands; for, otherwise,
a state may have a great stock, and yet starve. And money is like
muck,[176] not good except it be spread. This is done chiefly by
suppressing, or, at the least, keeping a strait hand upon the devouring
trades of usury, engrossing[177] great pasturages, and the like.

For removing discontentments, or, at least, the danger of them, there
is in every state (as we know) two portions of subjects, the nobles
and the commonalty. When one of these is discontent, the danger is not
great; for common people are of slow motion, if they be not excited by
the greater sort; and the greater sort are of small strength, except
the multitude be apt and ready to move of themselves; then is the
danger, when the greater sort do but wait for the troubling of the
waters amongst the meaner, that then they may declare themselves. The
poets feign that the rest of the gods would have bound Jupiter, which
he hearing of, by the counsel of Pallas, sent for Briareus, with his
hundred hands, to come in to his aid; an emblem, no doubt, to show how
safe it is for monarchs to make sure of the goodwill of common people.

To give moderate liberty for griefs and discontentments to evaporate
(so it be without too great insolency or bravery), is a safe way; for
he that turneth the humors back, and maketh the wound bleed inwards,
endangereth malign ulcers and pernicious imposthumations.

The part of Epimetheus[178] might well become Prometheus, in the case
of discontentments, for there is not a better provision against them.
Epimetheus, when griefs and evils flew abroad, at last shut the lid,
and kept Hope in the bottom of the vessel. Certainly, the politic and
artificial nourishing and entertaining of hopes, and carrying men
from hopes to hopes, is one of the best antidotes against the poison
of discontentments; and it is a certain sign of a wise government and
proceeding, when it can hold mens hearts by hopes, when it cannot by
satisfaction; and when it can handle things in such manner as no evil
shall appear so peremptory, but that it hath some outlet of hope; which
is the less hard to do, because both particular persons and factions
are apt enough to flatter themselves, or at least to brave that which
they believe not.

Also the foresight and prevention, that there be no likely or fit head
whereunto discontented persons may resort, and under whom they may
join, is a known but an excellent point of caution. I understand a fit
head to be one that hath greatness and reputation, that hath confidence
with the discontented party, and upon whom they turn their eyes, and
that is thought discontented in his own particular: which kind of
persons are either to be won and reconciled to the state, and that in
a fast and true manner; or to be fronted with some other of the same
party that may oppose them, and so divide the reputation. Generally,
the dividing and breaking of all factions and combinations that are
adverse to the state, and setting them at distance, or, at least,
distrust amongst themselves, is not one of the worst remedies; for it
is a desperate case, if those that hold with the proceeding of the
state be full of discord and faction, and those that are against it be
entire and united.

I have noted, that some witty and sharp speeches, which have fallen
from princes, have given fire to seditions. Csar did himself infinite
hurt in that speechSylla nescivit literas, non potuit dictare,[179]
for it did utterly cut off that hope which men had entertained, that
he would, at one time or other, give over his dictatorship. Galba
undid himself by that speech, Legi a se militem, non emi;[180] for
it put the soldiers out of hope of the donative. Probus, likewise,
by that speech, Si vixero, non opus erit amplius Romano imperio
militibus;[181] a speech of great despair for the soldiers, and many
the like. Surely princes had need, in tender matters and ticklish
times, to beware what they say, especially in these short speeches,
which fly abroad like darts, and are thought to be shot out of their
secret intentions; for as for large discourses, they are flat things,
and not so much noted.

Lastly, let princes, against all events, not be without some great
person, one or rather more, of military valor, near unto them, for the
repressing of seditions in their beginnings; for without that, there
useth to be more trepidation in court upon the first breaking out of
troubles than were fit, and the state runneth the danger of that which
Tacitus saith: Atque is habitus animorum fuit, ut pessimum facinus
auderent pauci, plures vellent, omnes paterentur:[182] but let such
military persons be assured, and well reputed of, rather than factious
and popular; holding also good correspondence with the other great men
in the state, or else the remedy is worse than the disease.




BACON_No.16:


I had rather believe all the fables in the legends,[183] and the
Talmud,[184] and the Alcoran, than that this universal frame is
without a mind; and, therefore, God never wrought miracle to convince
atheism, because his ordinary works convince it. It is true, that a
little philosophy[185] inclineth mans mind to atheism, but depth in
philosophy bringeth mens minds about to religion; for while the mind
of man looketh upon second causes scattered, it may sometimes rest
in them, and go no further; but when it beholdeth the chain of them
confederate, and linked together, it must needs fly to Providence and
Deity. Nay, even that school which is most accused of atheism, doth
most demonstrate religion: that is, the school of Leucippus,[186] and
Democritus,[187] and Epicurus; for it is a thousand times more credible
that four mutable elements, and one immutable fifth essence,[188] duly
and eternally placed, need no God, than that an army of infinite small
portions, or seeds unplaced, should have produced this order and beauty
without a divine marshal. The Scripture saith, The fool hath said
in his heart, there is no God;[189] it is not said, The fool hath
thought in his heart; so as he rather saith it by rote to himself,
as that he would have, than that he can thoroughly believe it, or be
persuaded of it; for none deny there is a God, but those for whom it
maketh[190] that there were no God. It appeareth in nothing more, that
atheism is rather in the lip than in the heart of man, than by this,
that atheists will ever be talking of that their opinion, as if they
fainted in it within themselves, and would be glad to be strengthened
by the consent of others; nay more, you shall have atheists strive
to get disciples, as it fareth with other sects; and, which is most
of all, you shall have of them that will suffer for atheism, and not
recant; whereas, if they did truly think that there were no such thing
as God, why should they trouble themselves? Epicurus is charged, that
he did but dissemble for his credits sake, when he affirmed there
were blessed natures, but such as enjoyed themselves without having
respect to the government of the world. Wherein they say he did
temporize, though in secret he thought there was no God; but certainly
he is traduced, for his words are noble and divine: Non Deos vulgi
negare profanum; sed vulgi opiniones Diis applicare profanum.[191]
Plato could have said no more; and, although he had the confidence to
deny the administration, he had not the power to deny the nature. The
Indians[192] of the west have names for their particular gods, though
they have no name for God; as if the heathens should have had the names
Jupiter, Apollo, Mars, &c., but not the word Deus, which shows that
even those barbarous people have the notion, though they have not the
latitude and extent of it; so that against atheists the very savages
take part with the very subtlest philosophers. The contemplative
atheist is rare; a Diagoras,[193] a Bion,[194] a Lucian,[195] perhaps,
and some others, and yet they seem to be more than they are; for
that all that impugn a received religion, or superstition, are, by
the adverse part, branded with the name of atheists. But the great
atheists indeed are hypocrites, which are ever handling holy things,
but without feeling, so as they must needs be cauterized in the end.
The causes of atheism are: divisions in religion, if they be many; for
any one main division addeth zeal to both sides, but many divisions
introduce atheism. Another is, scandal of priests, when it is come
to that which St. Bernard saith: Non est jam dicere, ut populus,
sic sacerdos; quia nec sic populus, ut sacerdos.[196] A third is,
custom of profane scoffing in holy matters, which doth by little and
little deface the reverence of religion: and lastly, learned times,
specially with peace and prosperity; for troubles and adversities do
more bow mens minds to religion. They that deny a God destroy a mans
nobility, for certainly man is of kin to the beasts by his body; and
if he be not of kin to God by his spirit, he is a base and ignoble
creature. It destroys likewise magnanimity, and the raising of human
nature; for, take an example of a dog, and mark what a generosity and
courage he will put on when he finds himself maintained by a man, who,
to him, is instead of a God, or melior natura;[197] which courage is
manifestly such as that creature, without that confidence of a better
nature than his own, could never attain. So man, when he resteth and
assureth himself upon divine protection and favor, gathereth a force
and faith, which human nature in itself could not obtain; therefore,
as atheism is in all respects hateful, so in this, that it depriveth
human nature of the means to exalt itself above human frailty. As it
is in particular persons, so it is in nations: never was there such a
state for magnanimity as Rome. Of this state hear what Cicero saith:
Quam volumus, licet, Patres conscripti, nos amemus, tamen nec numero
Hispanos, nec robore Gallos, nec calliditate Pnos, nec artibus
Grcos, nec denique hoc ipso hujus gentis et terr domestico nativoque
sensu Italos ipsos et Latinos; sed pietate, ac religione, atque hc
un sapienti, quod Deorum immortalium numine omnia regi, gubernarique
perspeximus, omnes gentes, nationesque superavimus.[198]




BACON_No.17:


It were better to have no opinion of God at all, than such an
opinion as is unworthy of him; for the one is unbelief, the other is
contumely,[199] and certainly superstition is the reproach of the
Deity. Plutarch saith well to that purpose: Surely, saith he, I
had rather a great deal men should say there was no such man at all
as Plutarch, than that they should say that there was one Plutarch
that would eat his children[200] as soon as they were born, as the
poets speak of Saturn; and, as the contumely is greater towards God,
so the danger is greater towards men. Atheism leaves a man to sense,
to philosophy, to natural piety, to laws, to reputation, all which may
be guides to an outward moral virtue, though religion were not; but
superstition dismounts all these, and erecteth an absolute monarchy
in the minds of men. Therefore atheism did never perturb states; for
it makes men wary of themselves, as looking no further, and we see
the times inclined to atheism (as the time of Augustus Csar) were
civil times; but superstition hath been the confusion of many states,
and bringeth in a new primum mobile,[201] that ravisheth all the
spheres of government. The master of superstition is the people, and
in all superstition wise men follow fools; and arguments are fitted
to practice in a reversed order. It was gravely said by some of the
prelates in the Council of Trent,[202] where the doctrine of the
schoolmen bare great sway, that the schoolmen were like astronomers,
which did feign eccentrics[203] and epicycles,[204] and such engines of
orbs to save[205] the phenomena, though they knew there were no such
things; and, in like manner, that the schoolmen had framed a number
of subtle and intricate axioms and theorems, to save the practice of
the Church. The causes of superstition are, pleasing and sensual rites
and ceremonies; excess of outward and pharisaical holiness; overgreat
reverence of traditions, which cannot but load the Church; the
stratagems of prelates for their own ambition and lucre; the favoring
too much of good intentions, which openeth the gate to conceits and
novelties; the taking an aim at divine matters by human, which cannot
but breed mixture of imaginations; and, lastly, barbarous times,
especially joined with calamities and disasters. Superstition, without
a veil, is a deformed thing; for, as it addeth deformity to an ape to
be so like a man, so the similitude of superstition to religion makes
it the more deformed; and as wholesome meat corrupteth to little worms,
so good forms and orders corrupt into a number of petty observances.
There is a superstition in avoiding superstition, when men think to
do best if they go furthest from the superstition formerly received;
therefore care would be had that (as it fareth in ill purgings) the
good be not taken away with the bad, which commonly is done when the
people is the reformer.




BACON_No.18:


Travel, in the younger sort, is a part of education; in the elder, a
part of experience. He that travelleth into a country before he hath
some entrance into the language, goeth to school, and not to travel.
That young men travel under some tutor or grave servant, I allow well,
so that he be such a one that hath the language, and hath been in the
country before; whereby he may be able to tell them what things are
worthy to be seen in the country where they go, what acquaintances they
are to seek, what exercises or discipline the place yieldeth; for else
young men shall go hooded, and look abroad little. It is a strange
thing that, in sea voyages, where there is nothing to be seen but sky
and sea, men should make diaries; but in land travel, wherein so much
is to be observed, for the most part they omit it, as if chance were
fitter to be registered than observation. Let diaries, therefore, be
brought in use. The things to be seen and observed are, the courts of
princes, especially when they give audience to ambassadors; the courts
of justice, while they sit and hear causes; and so of consistories[206]
ecclesiastic; the churches and monasteries, with the monuments which
are therein extant; the walls and fortifications of cities and towns;
and so the havens and harbors, antiquities and ruins, libraries,
colleges, disputations, and lectures, where any are; shipping and
navies; houses and gardens of state and pleasure, near great cities;
armories, arsenals, magazines, exchanges, burses, warehouses, exercises
of horsemanship, fencing, training of soldiers, and the like; comedies,
such whereunto the better sort of persons do resort; treasuries of
jewels and robes; cabinets and rarities; and, to conclude, whatsoever
is memorable in the places where they go, after all which the tutors
or servants ought to make diligent inquiry. As for triumphs, masks,
feasts, weddings, funerals, capital executions, and such shows, men
need not to be put in mind of them; yet they are not to be neglected.
If you will have a young man to put his travel into a little room,
and in short time to gather much, this you must do: first, as was
said, he must have some entrance into the language before he goeth;
then he must have such a servant, or tutor, as knoweth the country,
as was likewise said; let him carry with him also some card or book,
describing the country where he travelleth, which will be a good key
to his inquiry; let him keep also a diary; let him not stay long in
one city or town, more or less, as the place deserveth, but not long;
nay, when he stayeth in one city or town, let him change his lodging
from one end and part of the town to another, which is a great adamant
of acquaintance; let him sequester himself from the company of his
countrymen, and diet in such places where there is good company of the
nation where he travelleth; let him, upon his removes from one place
to another, procure recommendation to some person of quality residing
in the place whither he removeth, that he may use his favor in those
things he desireth to see or know: thus he may abridge his travel
with much profit. As for the acquaintance which is to be sought in
travel, that which is most of all profitable, is acquaintance with the
secretaries and employed men[207] of ambassadors, for so in travelling
in one country he shall suck the experience of many; let him also see
and visit eminent persons in all kinds which are of great name abroad,
that he may be able to tell how the life agreeth with the fame. For
quarrels, they are with care and discretion to be avoided; they are
commonly for mistresses, healths,[208] place, and words; and let a man
beware how he keepeth company with choleric and quarrelsome persons,
for they will engage him into their own quarrels. When a traveller
returneth home, let him not leave the countries where he hath travelled
altogether behind him, but maintain a correspondence by letters with
those of his acquaintance which are of most worth; and let his travel
appear rather in his discourse than in his apparel or gesture, and in
his discourse let him be rather advised in his answers, than forward
to tell stories; and let it appear that he doth not change his country
manners for those of foreign parts, but only prick in some flowers of
that he hath learned abroad into the customs of his own country.



BACON_No.19:


It is a miserable state of mind to have few things to desire, and
many things to fear; and yet that commonly is the case of kings, who,
being, at the highest, want matter of desire,[209] which makes their
minds more languishing; and have many representations of perils and
shadows, which makes their minds the less clear; and this is one
reason, also, of that effect which the Scripture speaketh of, that
the kings heart is inscrutable;[210] for multitude of jealousies,
and lack of some predominant desire, that should marshal and put in
order all the rest, maketh any mans heart hard to find or sound. Hence
it comes, likewise, that princes many times make themselves desires,
and set their hearts upon toys: sometimes upon a building; sometimes
upon erecting of an order; sometimes upon the advancing of a person;
sometimes upon obtaining excellency in some art or feat of the hand,as
Nero for playing on the harp; Domitian for certainty of the hand with
the arrow; Commodus for playing at fence;[211] Caracalla for driving
chariots, and the like. This seemeth incredible unto those that know
not the principle, that the mind of man is more cheered and refreshed
by profiting in small things than by standing at a stay[212] in great.
We see, also, that kings that have been fortunate conquerors in their
first years, it being not possible for them to go forward infinitely,
but that they must have some check or arrest in their fortunes, turn
in their latter years to be superstitious and melancholy; as did
Alexander the Great, Diocletian,[213] and, in our memory, Charles the
Fifth,[214] and others; for he that is used to go forward, and findeth
a stop, falleth out of his own favor, and is not the thing he was.

To speak now of the true temper of empire, it is a thing rare and hard
to keep, for both temper and distemper consist of contraries; but it is
one thing to mingle contraries, another to interchange them. The answer
of Apollonius to Vespasian is full of excellent instruction. Vespasian
asked him, What was Neros overthrow? He answered, Nero could touch
and tune the harp well; but in government sometimes he used to wind the
pins too high, sometimes to let them down too low.[215] And certain
it is, that nothing destroyeth authority so much as the unequal and
untimely interchange of power pressed too far, and relaxed too much.

This is true, that the wisdom of all these latter times in princes
affairs is rather fine deliveries, and shiftings of dangers and
mischiefs, when they are near, than solid and grounded courses to keep
them aloof; but this is but to try masteries with fortune, and let men
beware how they neglect and suffer matter of trouble to be prepared.
For no man can forbid the spark, nor tell whence it may come.
The difficulties in princes business are many and great; but the
greatest difficulty is often in their own mind. For it is common with
princes (saith Tacitus) to will contradictories: Sunt plerumque regum
voluntates vehementes, et inter se contrari;[216] for it is the
solecism of power to think to command the end, and yet not to endure
the mean.

Kings have to deal with their neighbors, their wives, their children,
their prelates or clergy, their nobles, their second nobles or
gentlemen, their merchants, their commons, and their men of war; and
from all these arise dangers, if care and circumspection be not used.

First, for their neighbors, there can no general rule be given (the
occasions are so variable), save one which ever holdeth; which is, that
princes do keep due sentinel, that none of their neighbors do overgrow
so (by increase of territory, by embracing of trade, by approaches,
or the like), as they become more able to annoy them than they were;
and this is generally the work of standing counsels to foresee and to
hinder it. During that triumvirate of kings, King Henry the Eighth of
England, Francis the First, King of France,[217] and Charles the Fifth,
Emperor, there was such a watch kept that none of the three could win
a palm of ground, but the other two would straightways balance it,
either by confederation, or, if need were, by a war; and would not,
in any wise, take up peace at interest; and the like was done by that
league (which Guicciardini[218] saith was the security of Italy) made
between Ferdinando, King of Naples, Lorenzius Medicis, and Ludovicus
Sforza, potentates, the one of Florence, the other of Milan. Neither is
the opinion of some of the schoolmen to be received, that a war cannot
justly be made, but upon a precedent injury or provocation; for there
is no question, but a just fear of an imminent danger, though there be
no blow given, is a lawful cause of a war.

For their wives, there are cruel examples of them. Livia is
infamed[219] for the poisoning of her husband; Roxolana, Solymans
wife,[220] was the destruction of that renowned prince, Sultan
Mustapha, and otherwise troubled his house and succession; Edward the
Second of Englands Queen[221] had the principal hand in the deposing
and murder of her husband.

This kind of danger is then to be feared chiefly when the wives have
plots for the raising of their own children, or else that they be
advoutresses.[222]

For their children, the tragedies likewise of dangers from them have
been many; and generally the entering of fathers into suspicion
of their children hath been ever unfortunate. The destruction of
Mustapha (that we named before) was so fatal to Solymans line, as the
succession of the Turks from Solyman until this day is suspected to be
untrue, and of strange blood; for that Selymus the Second was thought
to be supposititious.[223] The destruction of Crispus, a young prince
of rare towardness, by Constantinus the Great, his father, was in like
manner fatal to his house; for both Constantinus and Constance, his
sons, died violent deaths; and Constantius, his other son, did little
better, who died indeed of sickness, but after that Julianus had taken
arms against him. The destruction of Demetrius,[224] son to Philip the
Second of Macedon, turned upon the father, who died of repentance. And
many like examples there are; but few or none where the fathers had
good by such distrust, except it were where the sons were up in open
arms against them; as was Selymus the First against Bajazet, and the
three sons of Henry the Second, King of England.

For their prelates, when they are proud and great, there is also danger
from them; as it was in the times of Anselmus[225] and Thomas Becket,
Archbishops of Canterbury, who, with their crosiers, did almost try it
with the kings sword; and yet they had to deal with stout and haughty
kings; William Rufus, Henry the First, and Henry the Second. The danger
is not from that state, but where it hath a dependence of foreign
authority; or where the churchmen come in and are elected, not by the
collation of the King, or particular patrons, but by the people.

For their nobles, to keep them at a distance it is not amiss; but to
depress them may make a king more absolute, but less safe, and less
able to perform anything that he desires. I have noted it in my History
of King Henry the Seventh of England, who depressed his nobility,
whereupon it came to pass that his times were full of difficulties and
troubles; for the nobility, though they continued loyal unto him, yet
did they not coperate with him in his business; so that, in effect, he
was fain to do all things himself.

For their second nobles, there is not much danger from them, being
a body dispersed. They may sometimes discourse high, but that doth
little hurt; besides, they are a counterpoise to the higher nobility,
that they grow not too potent; and, lastly, being the most immediate
in authority with the common people, they do best temper popular
commotions.

For their merchants, they are vena porta:[226] and if they flourish
not, a kingdom may have good limbs, but will have empty veins, and
nourish little. Taxes and imposts upon them do seldom good to the
kings revenue, for that which he wins[227] in the hundred[228] he
loseth in the shire; the particular rates being increased, but the
total bulk of trading rather decreased.

For their commons, there is little danger from them, except it be where
they have great and potent heads; or where you meddle with the point of
religion, or their customs, or means of life.

For their men of war, it is a dangerous state where they live and
remain in a body, and are used to donatives; whereof we see examples in
the Janizaries[229] and Prtorian bands of Rome; but trainings of men,
and arming them in several places, and under several commanders, and
without donatives, are things of defence and no danger.

Princes are like to heavenly bodies, which cause good or evil times;
and which have much veneration, but no rest. All precepts concerning
kings are in effect comprehended in those two remembrances, Memento
quod es homo;[230] and Memento quod es Deus,[231] or vice
Dei;[232] the one bridleth their power and the other their will.




BACON_No.20:


The greatest trust between man and man is the trust of giving counsel;
for in other confidences men commit the parts of life, their lands,
their goods, their children, their credit, some particular affair;
but to such as they make their counsellors they commit the whole; by
how much the more they are obliged to all faith and integrity. The
wisest princes need not think it any diminution to their greatness, or
derogation to their sufficiency to rely upon counsel. God himself is
not without, but hath made it one of the great names of his blessed
Son, The Counsellor.[233] Solomon hath pronounced that, in counsel
is stability.[234] Things will have their first or second agitation:
if they be not tossed upon the arguments of counsel, they will be
tossed upon the waves of fortune, and be full of inconstancy, doing and
undoing, like the reeling of a drunken man. Solomons son[235] found
the force of counsel, as his father saw the necessity of it; for the
beloved kingdom of God was first rent and broken by ill counsel; upon
which counsel there are set for our instruction the two marks whereby
bad counsel is forever best discerned, that it was young counsel for
the persons, and violent counsel for the matter.

The ancient times do set forth in figure both the incorporation and
inseparable conjunction of counsel with kings, and the wise and politic
use of counsel by kings; the one, in that they say Jupiter did marry
Metis, which signifieth counsel; whereby they intend that sovereignty
is married to counsel; the other in that which followeth, which was
thus: they say, after Jupiter was married to Metis, she conceived by
him and was with child; but Jupiter suffered her not to stay till
she brought forth, but eat her up; whereby he became himself with
child, and was delivered of Pallas armed, out of his head.[236] Which
monstrous fable containeth a secret of empire, how kings are to make
use of their council of state; that first, they ought to refer matters
unto them, which is the first begetting or impregnation; but when they
are elaborate, moulded, and shaped in the womb of their counsel, and
grow ripe and ready to be brought forth, that then they suffer not
their council to go through with the resolution and direction, as if
it depended on them; but take the matter back into their own hands,
and make it appear to the world, that the decrees and final directions
(which, because they come forth with prudence and power, are resembled
to Pallas armed), proceeded from themselves; and not only from their
authority, but (the more to add reputation to themselves) from their
head and device.

Let us now speak of the inconveniences of counsel, and of the remedies.
The inconveniences that have been noted in calling and using counsel
are three: first, the revealing of affairs, whereby they become less
secret; secondly, the weakening of the authority of princes, as if they
were less of themselves; thirdly, the danger of being unfaithfully
counselled, and more for the good of them that counsel than of him
that is counselled; for which inconveniences, the doctrine of Italy,
and practice of France, in some kings times, hath introduced cabinet
councils; a remedy worse than the disease.[237]

As to secrecy, princes are not bound to communicate all matters with
all counsellors, but may extract and select; neither is it necessary
that he that consulteth what he should do, should declare what he will
do; but let princes beware that the unsecreting of their affairs comes
not from themselves; and, as for cabinet councils, it may be their
motto, Plenus rimarum sum:[238] one futile person, that maketh it
his glory to tell, will do more hurt than many that know it their duty
to conceal. It is true, there be some affairs which require extreme
secrecy, which will hardly go beyond one or two persons besides the
king. Neither are those counsels unprosperous; for, besides the
secrecy, they commonly go on constantly in one spirit of direction
without distraction; but then it must be a prudent king, such as is
able to grind with a handmill;[239] and those inward counsellors
had need also to be wise men, and especially true and trusty to the
kings ends; as it was with King Henry the Seventh of England, who,
in his greatest business, imparted himself to none, except it were to
Morton[240] and Fox.[241]

For weakening of authority, the fable[242] showeth the remedy; nay,
the majesty of kings is rather exalted than diminished when they are
in the chair of council; neither was there ever prince bereaved of
his dependencies by his council, except where there hath been either
an overgreatness in one counsellor, or an overstrict combination in
divers, which are things soon found and holpen.[243]

For the last inconvenience, that men will counsel with an eye to
themselves; certainly, non inveniet fidem super terram,[244] is meant
of the nature of times,[245] and not of all particular persons. There
be that are in nature faithful and sincere, and plain and direct, not
crafty and involved: let princes, above all, draw to themselves such
natures. Besides, counsellors are not commonly so united, but that one
counsellor keepeth sentinel over another; so that if any do counsel out
of faction or private ends, it commonly comes to the kings ear; but
the best remedy is, if princes know their counsellors, as well as their
counsellors know them:

  Principis est virtus maxima nosse suos.[246]

And on the other side, counsellors should not be too speculative
into their sovereigns person. The true composition of a counsellor
is, rather to be skilful in their masters business than in his
nature;[247] for then he is like to advise him, and not to feed his
humor. It is of singular use to princes, if they take the opinions of
their council both separately and together; for private opinion is
more free, but opinion before others is more reverend. In private,
men are more bold in their own humors; and in consort, men are more
obnoxious[248] to others humors; therefore it is good to take both;
and of the inferior sort rather in private, to preserve freedom; of
the greater, rather in consort, to preserve respect. It is in vain
for princes to take counsel concerning matters, if they take no
counsel likewise concerning persons; for all matters are as dead
images; and the life of the execution of affairs resteth in the good
choice of persons. Neither is it enough to consult concerning persons,
secundum genera,[249] as in an idea or mathematical description,
what the kind and character of the person should be; for the greatest
errors are committed, and the most judgment is shown, in the choice
of individuals. It was truly said, Optimi consiliarii mortui:[250]
books will speak plain when counsellors blanch;[251] therefore it
is good to be conversant in them, specially the books of such as
themselves have been actors upon the stage.

The councils at this day in most places are but familiar meetings,
where matters are rather talked on than debated; and they run too
swift to the order or act of council. It were better that in causes of
weight, the matter were propounded one day and not spoken to till the
next day; In nocte consilium;[252] so was it done in the commission
of union[253] between England and Scotland, which was a grave and
orderly assembly. I commend set days for petitions; for both it gives
the suitors more certainty for their attendance, and it frees the
meetings for matters of estate, that they may hoc agere.[254] In
choice of committees for ripening business for the council, it is
better to choose indifferent persons, than to make an indifferency
by putting in those that are strong on both sides. I commend, also,
standing commissions; as for trade, for treasure, for war, for suits,
for some provinces; for where there be divers particular councils, and
but one council of estate (as it is in Spain), they are in effect no
more than standing commissions, save that they have greater authority.
Let such as are to inform councils out of their particular professions
(as lawyers, seamen, mintmen, and the like) be first heard before
committees; and then, as occasion serves, before the council; and let
them not come in multitudes, or in a tribunitious[255] manner; for that
is to clamor councils, not to inform them. A long table and a square
table, or seats about the walls, seem things of form, but are things
of substance; for at a long table a few at the upper end, in effect,
sway all the business; but in the other form there is more use of
the counsellors opinions that sit lower. A king, when he presides in
council, let him beware how he opens his own inclination too much in
that which he propoundeth; for else counsellors will but take the wind
of him, and, instead of giving free counsel, will sing him a song of
placebo.[256]



BACON_No.21:


Fortune is like the market, where, many times, if you can stay a
little, the price will fall; and again, it is sometimes like Sibyllas
offer,[257] which at first offereth the commodity at full, then
consumeth part and part, and still holdeth up the price; for occasion
(as it is in the common verse) turneth a bald noddle,[258] after she
hath presented her locks in front, and no hold taken; or, at least,
turneth the handle of the bottle first to be received, and after the
belly, which is hard to clasp.[259] There is surely no greater wisdom
than well to time the beginnings and onsets of things. Dangers are no
more light, if they once seem light; and more dangers have deceived men
than forced them; nay, it were better to meet some dangers halfway,
though they come nothing near, than to keep too long a watch upon
their approaches; for if a man watch too long, it is odds he will
fall asleep. On the other side, to be deceived with too long shadows
(as some have been when the moon was low, and shone on their enemies
back), and so to shoot off before the time; or to teach dangers to
come on by over early buckling towards them, is another extreme. The
ripeness or unripeness of the occasion (as we said) must ever be well
weighed; and generally it is good to commit the beginnings of all great
actions to Argus with his hundred eyes, and the ends to Briareus with
his hundred hands, first to watch and then to speed; for the helmet of
Pluto,[260] which maketh the politic man go invisible, is secrecy in
the council, and celerity in the execution; for when things are once
come to the execution, there is no secrecy comparable to celerity; like
the motion of a bullet in the air, which flieth so swift as it outruns
the eye.




BACON_No.22:


We take cunning for a sinister, or crooked wisdom; and, certainly,
there is great difference between a cunning man and a wise man, not
only in point of honesty, but in point of ability. There be that can
pack the cards,[261] and yet cannot play well; so there are some that
are good in canvasses and factions, that are otherwise weak men. Again,
it is one thing to understand persons, and another thing to understand
matters; for many are perfect in mens humors that are not greatly
capable of the real part of business, which is the constitution of one
that hath studied men more than books. Such men are fitter for practice
than for counsel, and they are good but in their own alley. Turn them
to new men, and they have lost their aim; so as the old rule, to know a
fool from a wise man, Mitte ambos nudos ad ignotos, et videbis,[262]
doth scarce hold for them; and, because these cunning men are like
haberdashers[263] of small wares, it is not amiss to set forth their
shop.

It is a point of cunning to wait upon[264] him with whom you speak with
your eye, as the Jesuits give it in precept; for there be many wise men
that have secret hearts and transparent countenances; yet this would be
done with a demure abasing of your eye sometimes, as the Jesuits also
do use.

Another is, that when you have any thing to obtain of present dispatch,
you entertain and amuse the party with whom you deal with some other
discourse, that he be not too much awake to make objections. I knew a
counsellor and secretary that never came to Queen Elizabeth of England,
with bills to sign, but he would always first put her into some
discourse of estate,[265] that she might the less mind the bills.

The like surprise may be made by moving things[266] when the party is
in haste, and cannot stay to consider advisedly of that is moved.

If a man would cross a business that he doubts some other would
handsomely and effectually move, let him pretend to wish it well, and
move it himself, in such sort as may foil it.

The breaking off in the midst of that one was about to say, as if he
took himself up, breeds a greater appetite in him with whom you confer
to know more.

And because it works better when any thing seemeth to be gotten from
you by question than if you offer it of yourself, you may lay a bait
for a question, by showing another visage and countenance than you are
wont; to the end, to give occasion for the party to ask what the matter
is of the change, as Nehemiah[267] did: And I had not, before that
time, been sad before the king.

In things that are tender and unpleasing, it is good to break the ice
by some whose words are of less weight, and to reserve the more weighty
voice to come in as by chance, so that he may be asked the question
upon the others speech; as Narcissus did, in relating to Claudius the
marriage[268] of Messalina and Silius.

In things that a man would not be seen in himself, it is a point of
cunning to borrow the name of the world; as to say, The world says,
or There is a speech abroad.

I knew one, that when he wrote a letter, he would put that which was
most material in a postscript, as if it had been a bymatter.

I knew another, that when he came to have speech,[269] he would pass
over that that he intended most; and go forth and come back again, and
speak of it as a thing that he had almost forgot.

Some procure themselves to be surprised at such times as it is like
the party that they work upon will suddenly come upon them, and to be
found with a letter in their hand, or doing somewhat which they are not
accustomed, to the end they may be apposed of[270] those things which
of themselves they are desirous to utter.

It is a point of cunning to let fall those words in a mans own name,
which he would have another man learn and use, and thereupon take
advantage. I knew two that were competitors for the secretarys place
in Queen Elizabeths time, and yet kept good quarter[271] between
themselves, and would confer one with another upon the business; and
the one of them said, that to be a secretary in the declination of a
monarchy was a ticklish thing, and that he did not affect it;[272]
the other straight caught up those words, and discoursed with divers
of his friends, that he had no reason to desire to be secretary in
the declination of a monarchy. The first man took hold of it, and
found means it was told the queen, who, hearing of a declination of a
monarchy, took it so ill, as she would never after hear of the others
suit.

There is a cunning, which we in England call the turning of the cat in
the pan; which is, when that which a man says to another, he lays it
as if another had said it to him; and, to say truth, it is not easy,
when such a matter passed between two, to make it appear from which of
them it first moved and began.

It is a way that some men have, to glance and dart at others by
justifying themselves by negatives; as to say, This I do not;
as Tigellinus did towards Burrhus: Se non diversas spes, sed
incolumitatem imperatoris simpliciter spectare.[273]

Some have in readiness so many tales and stories, as there is nothing
they would insinuate, but they can wrap it into a tale;[274] which
serveth both to keep themselves more in guard, and to make others carry
it with more pleasure.

It is a good point of cunning for a man to shape the answer he would
have in his own words and propositions; for it makes the other party
stick the less.

It is strange how long some men will lie in wait to speak somewhat
they desire to say; and how far about they will fetch,[275] and how
many other matters they will beat over to come near it. It is a thing
of great patience, but yet of much use.

A sudden, bold, and unexpected question doth many times surprise a
man, and lay him open. Like to him, that, having changed his name, and
walking in Pauls,[276] another suddenly came behind him and called him
by his true name, whereat straightways he looked back.

But these small wares and petty points of cunning are infinite, and it
were a good deed to make a list of them; for that nothing doth more
hurt in a state than that cunning men pass for wise.

But certainly, some there are that know the resorts[277] and falls[278]
of business that cannot sink into the main of it;[279] like a house
that hath convenient stairs and entries, but never a fair room.
Therefore you shall see them find out pretty looses[280] in the
conclusion, but are noways able to examine or debate matters; and yet
commonly they take advantage of their inability, and would be thought
wits of direction. Some build rather upon the abusing of others, and
(as we now say) putting tricks upon them, than upon soundness of their
own proceedings; but Solomon saith: Prudens advertit ad gressus suos;
stultus divertit ad dolos.[281]




BACON_No.23:


An ant is a wise creature for itself, but it is a shrewd[282] thing
in an orchard or garden; and certainly, men that are great lovers of
themselves waste the public. Divide with reason between selflove and
society; and be so true to thyself as thou be not false to others,
specially to thy king and country. It is a poor centre of a mans
actions, himself. It is right earth; for that only stands fast upon
his own centre;[283] whereas all things that have affinity with the
heavens, move upon the centre of another, which they benefit. The
referring of all to a mans self is more tolerable in a sovereign
prince, because themselves are not only themselves, but their good and
evil is at the peril of the public fortune; but it is a desperate evil
in a servant to a prince, or a citizen in a republic; for whatsoever
affairs pass such a mans hands, he crooketh them to his own ends,
which must needs be often eccentric to the ends of his master or state.
Therefore, let princes or states choose such servants as have not this
mark; except they mean their service should be made but the accessary.
That which maketh the effect more pernicious is, that all proportion
is lost. It were disproportion enough for the servants good to be
preferred before the masters; but yet it is a greater extreme, when
a little good of the servant shall carry things against a great good
of the master. And yet that is the case of bad officers, treasurers,
ambassadors, generals, and other false and corrupt servants; which
set a bias upon their bowl, of their own petty ends and envies, to
the overthrow of their masters great and important affairs; and, for
the most part, the good such servants receive is after the model of
their own fortune; but the hurt they sell for that good is after the
model of their masters fortune. And certainly, it is the nature of
extreme selflovers, as they will set a house on fire, an it were but
to roast their eggs; and yet these men many times hold credit with
their masters, because their study is but to please them, and profit
themselves; and for either respect they will abandon the good of their
affairs.

Wisdom for a mans self is, in many branches thereof, a depraved
thing. It is the wisdom of rats, that will be sure to leave a house
somewhat before it fall; it is the wisdom of the fox, that thrusts
out the badger who digged and made room for him; it is the wisdom of
crocodiles, that shed tears when they would devour. But that which is
specially to be noted is, that those which (as Cicero says of Pompey)
are sui amantes, sine rivali,[284] are many times unfortunate; and
whereas they have all their times sacrificed to themselves, they become
in the end themselves sacrifices to the inconstancy of fortune, whose
wings they thought by their selfwisdom to have pinioned.




BACON_No.24:


As the births of living creatures at first are illshapen, so are
all innovations, which are the births of time; yet, notwithstanding,
as those that first bring honor into their family are commonly more
worthy than most that succeed, so the first precedent (if it be good)
is seldom attained by imitation; for ill to mans nature as it stands
perverted, hath a natural motion strongest in continuance, but good,
as a forced motion, strongest at first. Surely, every medicine[285]
is an innovation, and he that will not apply new remedies must expect
new evils, for time is the greatest innovator; and if time, of course,
alter things to the worse, and wisdom and counsel shall not alter
them to the better, what shall be the end? It is true, that what is
settled by custom, though it be not good, yet, at least, it is fit;
and those things which have long gone together, are, as it were,
confederate within themselves;[286] whereas new things piece not so
well; but, though they help by their utility, yet they trouble by their
inconformity; besides, they are like strangers, more admired and less
favored. All this is true, if time stood still, which, contrariwise,
moveth so round, that a froward retention of custom is as turbulent
a thing as an innovation; and they that reverence too much old times
are but a scorn to the new. It were good, therefore, that men in their
innovations would follow the example of time itself, which indeed
innovateth greatly, but quietly, and by degrees scarce to be perceived;
for, otherwise, whatsoever is new is unlooked for, and ever it
mends some and pairs[287] other; and he that is holpen, takes it for
a fortune, and thanks the time; and he that is hurt, for a wrong, and
imputeth it to the author. It is good, also, not to try experiments in
states, except the necessity be urgent, or the utility evident; and
well to beware that it be the reformation that draweth on the change,
and not the desire of change that pretendeth the reformation; and
lastly, that the novelty, though it be not rejected, yet be held for
a suspect,[288] and, as the Scripture saith, That we make a stand
upon the ancient way, and then look about us, and discover what is the
straight and right way, and so to walk in it.[289]




BACON_No.25:


Affected dispatch is one of the most dangerous things to business
that can be; it is like that which the physicians call predigestion,
or hasty digestion, which is sure to fill the body full of crudities,
and secret seeds of diseases. Therefore, measure not dispatch by the
times of sitting, but by the advancement of the business; and as in
races, it is not the large stride, or high lift, that makes the speed,
so in business, the keeping close to the matter, and not taking of it
too much at once, procureth dispatch. It is the care of some, only to
come off speedily for the time, or to contrive some false periods of
business, because they may seem men of dispatch; but it is one thing to
abbreviate by contracting,[290] another by cutting off; and business so
handled at several sittings, or meetings, goeth commonly backward and
forward in an unsteady manner. I knew a wise man[291] that had it for
a byword, when he saw men hasten to a conclusion, Stay a little, that
we may make an end the sooner.

On the other side, true dispatch is a rich thing; for time is the
measure of business, as money is of wares; and business is bought at
a dear hand where there is small dispatch. The Spartans and Spaniards
have been noted to be of small dispatch: Mi venga la muerte de
Spagna; Let my death come from Spain; for then it will be sure to be
long in coming.

Give good hearing to those that give the first information in business,
and rather direct them in the beginning, than interrupt them in the
continuance of their speeches; for he that is put out of his own order
will go forward and backward, and be more tedious while he waits upon
his memory, than he could have been if he had gone on in his own
course; but sometimes it is seen that the moderator is more troublesome
than the actor.

Iterations are commonly loss of time; but there is no such gain of time
as to iterate often the state of the question; for it chaseth away many
a frivolous speech as it is coming forth. Long and curious speeches
are as fit for dispatch as a robe, or mantle, with a long train, is
for a race. Prefaces, and passages,[292] and excusations,[293] and
other speeches of reference to the person, are great wastes of time;
and though they seem to proceed of modesty, they are bravery.[294]
Yet beware of being too material when there is any impediment, or
obstruction in mens wills; for preoccupation of mind[295] ever
requireth preface of speech, like a fomentation to make the unguent
enter.

Above all things, order and distribution, and singling out of parts,
is the life of dispatch, so as the distribution be not too subtile;
for he that doth not divide will never enter well into business; and
he that divideth too much will never come out of it clearly. To choose
time is to save time; and an unseasonable motion is but beating the
air. There be three parts of business,the preparation; the debate, or
examination; and the perfection. Whereof, if you look for dispatch, let
the middle only be the work of many, and the first and last the work of
few. The proceeding, upon somewhat conceived in writing, doth for the
most part facilitate dispatch; for though it should be wholly rejected,
yet that negative is more pregnant of direction than an indefinite, as
ashes are more generative than dust.
