  SHAKESPEARE_No.1:
  From fairest creatures we desire increase,
  That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
  But as the riper should by time decease,
  His tender heir might bear his memory:
  But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
  Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel,
  Making a famine where abundance lies,
  Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
  Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament,
  And only herald to the gaudy spring,
  Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
  And tender churl mak'st waste in niggarding:
    Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
    To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.2:
  When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
  And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
  Thy youth's proud livery so gazed on now,
  Will be a tatter'd weed of small worth held:
  Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,
  Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;
  To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes,
  Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.
  How much more praise deserv'd thy beauty's use,
  If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
  Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,'
  Proving his beauty by succession thine!
    This were to be new made when thou art old,
    And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.3:
  Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest
  Now is the time that face should form another;
  Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
  Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
  For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb
  Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
  Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
  Of his self-love to stop posterity?
  Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee
  Calls back the lovely April of her prime;
  So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
  Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
    But if thou live, remember'd not to be,
    Die single and thine image dies with thee.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.4:
  Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend
  Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy?
  Nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend,
  And being frank she lends to those are free:
  Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse
  The bounteous largess given thee to give?
  Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
  So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live?
  For having traffic with thy self alone,
  Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive:
  Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
  What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
    Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
    Which, used, lives th' executor to be.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.5:
  Those hours, that with gentle work did frame
  The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
  Will play the tyrants to the very same
  And that unfair which fairly doth excel;
  For never-resting time leads summer on
  To hideous winter, and confounds him there;
  Sap checked with frost, and lusty leaves quite gone,
  Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where:
  Then were not summer's distillation left,
  A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
  Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
  Nor it, nor no remembrance what it was:
    But flowers distill'd, though they with winter meet,
    Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.


  SHAKESPEARE_No.6:
  Then let not winter's ragged hand deface,
  In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd:
  Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
  With beauty's treasure ere it be self-kill'd.
  That use is not forbidden usury,
  Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
  That's for thy self to breed another thee,
  Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;
  Ten times thy self were happier than thou art,
  If ten of thine ten times refigur'd thee:
  Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
  Leaving thee living in posterity?
    Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair
    To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.7:
  Lo! in the orient when the gracious light
  Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
  Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
  Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
  And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill,
  Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
  Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
  Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
  But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,
  Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day,
  The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are
  From his low tract, and look another way:
    So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon:
    Unlook'd, on diest unless thou get a son.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.8:
  Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
  Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
  Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly,
  Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
  If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
  By unions married, do offend thine ear,
  They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
  In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.
  Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
  Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
  Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
  Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
    Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
    Sings this to thee: 'Thou single wilt prove none.'

  SHAKESPEARE_No.9:
  Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye,
  That thou consum'st thy self in single life?
  Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
  The world will wail thee like a makeless wife;
  The world will be thy widow and still weep
  That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
  When every private widow well may keep
  By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind:
  Look! what an unthrift in the world doth spend
  Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
  But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
  And kept unused the user so destroys it.
    No love toward others in that bosom sits
    That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.10:
  For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any,
  Who for thy self art so unprovident.
  Grant, if thou wilt, thou art belov'd of many,
  But that thou none lov'st is most evident:
  For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate,
  That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire,
  Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
  Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
  O! change thy thought, that I may change my mind:
  Shall hate be fairer lodg'd than gentle love?
  Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
  Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
    Make thee another self for love of me,
    That beauty still may live in thine or thee.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.11:
  As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st,
  In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
  And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st,
  Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest,
  Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase;
  Without this folly, age, and cold decay:
  If all were minded so, the times should cease
  And threescore year would make the world away.
  Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
  Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish:
  Look, whom she best endow'd, she gave thee more;
  Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
    She carv'd thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
    Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.12:
  When I do count the clock that tells the time,
  And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
  When I behold the violet past prime,
  And sable curls, all silvered o'er with white;
  When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
  Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
  And summer's green all girded up in sheaves,
  Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard,
  Then of thy beauty do I question make,
  That thou among the wastes of time must go,
  Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
  And die as fast as they see others grow;
    And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
    Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.13:
  O! that you were your self; but, love you are
  No longer yours, than you your self here live:
  Against this coming end you should prepare,
  And your sweet semblance to some other give:
  So should that beauty which you hold in lease
  Find no determination; then you were
  Yourself again, after yourself's decease,
  When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
  Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
  Which husbandry in honour might uphold,
  Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
  And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
    O! none but unthrifts. Dear my love, you know,
    You had a father: let your son say so.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.14:
  Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck;
  And yet methinks I have astronomy,
  But not to tell of good or evil luck,
  Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality;
  Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
  Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
  Or say with princes if it shall go well
  By oft predict that I in heaven find:
  But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
  And constant stars in them I read such art
  As 'Truth and beauty shall together thrive,
  If from thyself, to store thou wouldst convert';
    Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
    'Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.'

  SHAKESPEARE_No.15:
  When I consider every thing that grows
  Holds in perfection but a little moment,
  That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
  Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
  When I perceive that men as plants increase,
  Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky,
  Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
  And wear their brave state out of memory;
  Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
  Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
  Where wasteful Time debateth with decay
  To change your day of youth to sullied night,
    And all in war with Time for love of you,
    As he takes from you, I engraft you new.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.16:
  But wherefore do not you a mightier way
  Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?
  And fortify your self in your decay
  With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
  Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
  And many maiden gardens, yet unset,
  With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
  Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
  So should the lines of life that life repair,
  Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen,
  Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
  Can make you live your self in eyes of men.
    To give away yourself, keeps yourself still,
    And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.17:
  Who will believe my verse in time to come,
  If it were fill'd with your most high deserts?
  Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
  Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts.
  If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
  And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
  The age to come would say 'This poet lies;
  Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.'
  So should my papers, yellow'd with their age,
  Be scorn'd, like old men of less truth than tongue,
  And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage
  And stretched metre of an antique song:
    But were some child of yours alive that time,
    You should live twice,--in it, and in my rhyme.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.18:
  Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
  Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
  Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
  And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
  Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
  And often is his gold complexion dimm'd,
  And every fair from fair sometime declines,
  By chance, or nature's changing course untrimm'd:
  But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
  Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
  Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
  When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st,
    So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
    So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.19:
  Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
  And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
  Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
  And burn the long-liv'd phoenix, in her blood;
  Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
  And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
  To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
  But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
  O! carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
  Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen;
  Him in thy course untainted do allow
  For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
    Yet, do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong,
    My love shall in my verse ever live young.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.20:
  A woman's face with nature's own hand painted,
  Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion;
  A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
  With shifting change, as is false women's fashion:
  An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
  Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
  A man in hue all 'hues' in his controlling,
  Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
  And for a woman wert thou first created;
  Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting,
  And by addition me of thee defeated,
  By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
    But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure,
    Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.21:
  So is it not with me as with that Muse,
  Stirr'd by a painted beauty to his verse,
  Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
  And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
  Making a couplement of proud compare.
  With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems,
  With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare,
  That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
  O! let me, true in love, but truly write,
  And then believe me, my love is as fair
  As any mother's child, though not so bright
  As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air:
    Let them say more that like of hearsay well;
    I will not praise that purpose not to sell.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.22:
  My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
  So long as youth and thou are of one date;
  But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
  Then look I death my days should expiate.
  For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
  Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
  Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me:
  How can I then be elder than thou art?
  O! therefore love, be of thyself so wary
  As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
  Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
  As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
    Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain,
    Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.23:
  As an unperfect actor on the stage,
  Who with his fear is put beside his part,
  Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
  Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart;
  So I, for fear of trust, forget to say
  The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
  And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
  O'ercharg'd with burthen of mine own love's might.
  O! let my looks be then the eloquence
  And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
  Who plead for love, and look for recompense,
  More than that tongue that more hath more express'd.
    O! learn to read what silent love hath writ:
    To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.24:
  Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd,
  Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
  My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
  And perspective it is best painter's art.
  For through the painter must you see his skill,
  To find where your true image pictur'd lies,
  Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
  That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
  Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:
  Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
  Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
  Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
    Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
    They draw but what they see, know not the heart.

  SHAKESPEARE_No.25:
  Let those who are in favour with their stars
  Of public honour and proud titles boast,
  Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars
  Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
  Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
  But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
  And in themselves their pride lies buried,
  For at a frown they in their glory die.
  The painful warrior famoused for fight,
  After a thousand victories once foil'd,
  Is from the book of honour razed quite,
  And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd:
    Then happy I, that love and am belov'd,
    Where I may not remove nor be remov'd.

DE_VERE_No.1:
1 The labouring man that tills the fertile soil
2 And reaps the harvest fruit hath not indeed
3 The gain, but pain, and if for all his toil
4 He gets the straw, the Lord will have the seed.
5 The Manchet fine falls not unto his share,
6 On coarsest cheat his hungry stomach feeds.
7 The Landlord doth possess the finest fare;
8 He pulls the flowers, the other plucks but weeds.
9 The mason poor, that builds the Lordly halls,
10 Dwells not in them, they are for high degree;
11 His Cottage is compact in paper walls,
12 And not with brick or stone as others be.
13 The idle Drone that labours not at all
14 Sucks up the sweet of honey from the Bee.
15 Who worketh most, to their share least doth fall;
16 With due desert reward will never be.
17 The swiftest Hare unto the Mastiff slow
18 Oft times doth fall to him as for a prey;
19 The Greyhound thereby doth miss his game we know
20 For which he made such speedy haste away.
21 So he that takes the pain to pen the book
22 Reaps not the gifts of goodly golden Muse,
23 But those gain that who on the work shall look,
24 And from the sour the sweet by skill doth choose.
25 For he that beats the bush the bird not gets,
26 But who sits still, and holdeth fast the nets. 

DE_VERE_No.2:
1 Even as the wax doth melt, or dew consume away
2 Before the Sun, so I, behold, through careful thoughts decay,
3 For my best luck leads me to such sinister state
4 That I do waste with others’ love, that hath myself in hate,
5 And he that beats the bush, the wished bird not gets,
6 But such I see as sitteth still, and holds the fowling nets.
7 The Drone more honey sucks, that laboureth not at all,
8 Than doth the Bee, to whose most pain least pleasure doth befall;
9 The Gardener sows the seeds whereof the flowers do grow,
10 And others yet do gather them that took less pain, I know;
11 So I the pleasant grape have pulled from the Vine,
12 And yet I languish in great thirst while others drink the wine.
13 Thus like a woeful wight I wove my web of woe;
14 The more I would weed out my cares, the more they seem to grow.
15 The which betokeneth hope, forsaken is of me,
16 That with the careful culver climbs the worn and withered tree
17 To entertain my thoughts, and there my hap to moan,
18 That never am less idle, lo, than when I am alone.

DE_VERE_No.3:
1 A Crown of Bays shall that man wear
2 That triumphs over me,
3 For Black and Tawny will I wear,
4 Which mourning colours be.
5 The more I followed on, the more she fled away,
6 As Daphne did full long agone, Apollo’s wishful prey;
7 The more my plaints resound, the less she pities me;
8 The more I sought, the less I found that mine she meant to be.
9 Melpomene, alas, with doleful tunes help then,
10 And sing (bis), woe worth on me, forsaken man.
11 Then Daphne’s Bays shall that man wear that triumphs over me,
12 For Black and Tawny will I wear, which mourning colours be.
13 Drown me you trickling tears, you wailful wights of woe;
14 Come help these hands to rent my hairs, my rueful haps to show
15 On whom the scorching flames of love doth feed you see;
16 Ah lalantida, my dear dame hath thus tormented me.
17 Wherefore you Muses nine, with doleful tunes help then,
18 And sing (bis), woe worth on me, forsaken man.
19 Then Daphne’s Bays shall that man wear that triumphs over me,
20 For Black and Tawny will I wear, which mourning colours be.
21 An Anchor’s life to lead, with nails to scratch my grave,
22 Where earthly Worms on me shall feed, is all the joys I crave,
23 And hide myself from shame, sith that mine eyes do see,
24 Ah lalantida, my dear dame hath thus tormented me.
25 And all that present be, with doleful tunes help then,
26 And sing (bis), woe worth on me, forsaken man.

DE_VERE_No.4:
1 Framed in the front of forlorn hope, past all recovery,
2 I stayless stand t’abide the shock of shame and infamy.
3 My life, through lingering long, is lodged in lair of loathsome ways,
4 My death delayed to keep from life the harm of hapless days.
5 My sprites, my heart, my wit and force in deep distress are drowned;
6 The only loss of my good name is of these griefs the ground.
7 And since my mind, my wit, my head, my voice and tongue are weak
8 To utter, move, devise, conceive, sound forth, declare and speak
9 Such piercing plaints as answer might, or would, my woeful case,
10 Help crave I must, and crave I will, with tears upon my face
11 Of all that may in heaven or hell, in earth or air, be found
12 To wail with me this loss of mine, as of these griefs the ground.
13 Help gods, help saints, help sprites and powers that in the heaven do dwell,
14 Help ye that are to wail, ay wont, ye howling hounds of hell,
15 Help man, help beasts, help birds and worms that on the earth doth toil,
16 Help fish, help fowl that flocks and feeds upon the salt sea soil,
17 Help echo that in air doth flee, shrill voices to resound
18 To wail this loss of my good name, as of these griefs the ground.

DE_VERE_No.5:
1 I am not as I seem to be,
2 Nor when I smile I am not glad,
3 A thrall although you count me free
4 I, most in mirth, most pensive-sad;
5 I smile to shade my bitter spite,
6 As Hannibal, that saw in sight
7 His country soil, with Carthage town,
8 By Roman force defaced down.
9 And Caesar, that presented was
10 With noble Pompey’s princely head,
11 As ’twere some judge to rule the case,
12 A flood of tears he seemed to shed;
13 Although indeed it sprung of joy,
14 Yet others thought it was annoy;
15 Thus contraries be used, I find,
16 Of wise to cloak the covert mind.
17 I Hannibal, that smiles for grief,
18 And let you Caesar’s tears suffice,
19 The one that laughs at his mischief,
20 The other all for joy that cries;
21 I smile to see me scorned so,
22 You weep for joy to see me woe,
23 And I a heart by love slain dead
24 Presents, in place of Pompey’s head.
25 O cruel hap and hard estate
26 That forceth me to love my foe,
27 Accursed by so foul a fate
28 My choice for to prefix it so,
29 So long to fight with secret sore,
30 And find no secret salve therefor;
31 Some purge their pain by plaint, I find,
32 But I in vain do breathe my wind.

DE_VERE_No.6:
1 If care or skill could conquer vain desire,
2 Or reason’s reins my strong affection stay,
3 Then should my sighs to quiet breast retire,
4 And shun such signs as secret thoughts bewray;
5 Uncomely love, which now lurks in my breast,
6 Should cease my grief, through wisdom’s power oppressed.
7 But who can leave to look on Venus’ face,
8 Or yieldeth not to Juno’s high estate?
9 What wit so wise as gives not Pallas place?
10 These virtues rare each God did yield a mate,
11 Save her alone who yet on earth doth reign,
12 Whose beauty’s string no Gods can well distrain.
13 What worldly wight can hope for heavenly hire
14 When only sighs must make his secret moan?
15 A silent suit doth seld to Grace aspire;
16 My hapless hap doth roll the restless stone;
17 Yet Phoebe fair disdained the heavens above,
18 To joy on earth her poor Endymion’s love.
19 Rare is reward where none can justly crave,
20 For chance is choice where reason makes no claim;
21 Yet luck sometimes despairing souls doth save:
22 A happy star made Gyges joy attain;
23 A slavish smith of rude and rascal race
24 Found means in time to gain a Goddess’ grace.
25 Then lofty Love thy sacred sails advance;
26 My seething seas shall flow with streams of tears.
27 Amidst disdain drive forth my doleful chance;
28 A valiant mind no deadly danger fears.
29 Who loves aloft and sets his heart on high,
30 Deserves no pain, though he do pine and die

DE_VERE_No.7:
1 My meaning is to work what wonders love hath wrought,
2 Wherewith I muse why men of wit have love so dearly bought;
3 For love is worse than hate, and eke more harm hath done:
4 Record I take of those that rede of Paris, Priam’s son.
5 It seemed the God of sleep had mazed so much his wits
6 When he refused wit for love, which cometh but by fits;
7 But why accuse I him, whom earth hath covered long?
8 There be of his posterity alive, I do him wrong.
9 Whom I might well condemn to be a cruel judge
10 Unto myself, who hath the crime in others that I grudge.

DE_VERE_No.8:
1 The lively lark stretched forth her wing,
2 The messenger of morning bright,
3 And with her cheerful voice did sing
4 The day’s approach, discharging night,
5 When that Aurora, blushing red,
6 Descried the guilt of Thetis’ bed.
7 I went abroad to take the air,
8 And in the meads I met a knight,
9 Clad in carnation colour fair;
10 I did salute this gentle wight,
11 Of him I did his name inquire.
12 He sighed, and said he was desire.
13 Desire I did desire to stay,
14 Awhile with him I craved to talk;
15 The courteous knight said me no nay,
16 But hand in hand with me did walk.
17 Then of desire I asked again
18 What thing did please and what did pain?
19 He smiled, and thus he answered then,
20 ‘Desire can have no greater pain
21 ‘Than for to see another man
22 ‘That he desireth to obtain;
23 ‘Nor greater joy can be than this,
24 ‘Than to enjoy that others miss.’

DE_VERE_No.9:
1 The trickling tears that fall along my cheeks,
2 The secret sighs that show my inward grief,
3 The present pains perforce that love ay seeks,
4 Bid me renew my cares without relief
5 In woeful song, in dole display,
6 My pensive heart for to bewray.
7 Bewray thy grief, thou woeful heart, with speed,
8 Resign thy voice to her that caused thy woe;
9 With irksome cries bewail thy late-done deed,
10 For she thou lovest is sure thy mortal foe,
11 And help for thee there is none sure,
12 But still in pain thou must endure.
13 The stricken Deer hath help to heal his wound,
14 The haggard hawk with toil is made full tame,
15 The strongest tower the Cannon lays on ground,
16 The wisest wit that ever had the fame
17 Was thrall to Love by Cupid’s sleights;
18 Then weigh my case with equal weights.
19 She is my joy, she is my care and woe,
20 She is my pain, she is my ease therefor,
21 She is my death, she is my life also,
22 She is my salve, she is my wounded sore;
23 In fine, she hath the hand and knife
24 That may both save and end my life.
25 And shall I live on earth to be her thrall?
26 And shall I sue and serve her all in vain?
27 And shall I kiss the steps that she lets fall?
28 And shall I pray the gods to keep the pain
29 From her, that is so cruel still?
30 No, no, on her work all your will.
31 And let her feel the power of all your might,
32 And let her have her most desire with speed,
33 And let her pine away both day and night,
34 And let her moan, and none lament her need,
35 And let all those that shall her see
36 Despise her state, and pity me.

DE_VERE_No.10:
1 Fain would I sing but fury makes me fret,
2 And rage hath sworn to seek revenge of wrong;
3 My mazed mind in malice so is set
4 As death shall daunt my deadly dolours long.
5 Patience perforce is such a pinching pain,
6 As die I will or suffer wrong again.
7 I am no sot to suffer such abuse
8 As doth bereave my heart of his delight,
9 Nor will I frame myself to such as use
10 With calm consent to suffer such despite.
11 No quiet sleep shall once possess mine eye,
12 Till wit have wrought his will on injury.
13 My heart shall fail and hand shall lose his force,
14 But some device shall pay despite his due;
15 And fury shall consume my careful corse,
16 Or raze the ground whereon my sorrow grew.
17 Lo, thus in rage of ruthful mind refused,
18 I rest revenged of whom I am abused.

DE_VERE_No.11:
1 When wert thou born, desire?
2 In pomp and prime of May.
3 By whom, sweet boy, wert thou begot?
4 By good conceit, men say.
5 Tell me, who was thy nurse?
6 Fresh youth in sugared joy.
7 What was thy meat and daily food?
8 Sad sighs with great annoy.
9 What hadst thou then to drink?
10 Unfeigned lovers’ tears.
11 What cradle wert thou rocked in?
12 In hope devoid of fears.
13 What brought thee then asleep?
14 Sweet speech, that liked me best.
15 And where is now thy dwelling-place?
16 In gentle hearts I rest.
17 Doth company displease?
18 It doth in many a one.
19 Where would desire then choose to be?
20 He likes to muse alone.
21 What feedeth most your sight?
22 To gaze on favour still.
23 What findest thou most to be thy foe?
24 Disdain of my goodwill.
25 Will ever age or death
26 Bring thee unto decay?
27 No, no, desire both lives and dies
28 Ten thousand times a day.

DE_VERE_No.12:
1 Winged with desire, I seek to mount on high,
2 Clogged with mishap yet am I kept full low;
3 Who seeks to live and finds the way to die,
4 Sith comfort ebbs, and cares do daily flow,
5 But sad despair would have me to retire,
6 When smiling hope sets forward my desire.
7 I still do toil and never am at rest,
8 Enjoying least when I do covet most;
9 With weary thoughts are my green years oppressed,
10 To danger drawn from my desired coast;
11 Now crazed with Care, then haled up with Hope,
12 With world at will yet wanting wished scope.
13 I like in heart, yet dare not say I love,
14 And looks alone do lend me chief relief.
15 I dwelt sometimes at rest yet must remove,
16 With feigned joy I hide my secret grief.
17 I would possess yet needs must flee the place
18 Where I do seek to win my chiefest grace.
19 Lo, thus I live twixt fear and comfort tossed,
20 With least abode where best I feel content;
21 I seld resort where I should settle most,
22 My sliding times too soon with her are spent;
23 I hover high and soar where Hope doth tower,
24 Yet froward Fate defers my happy hour.
25 I live abroad but still in secret grief,
26 Then least alone when most I seem to lurk;
27 I speak of peace, and live in endless strife,
28 And when I play then are my thoughts at work;
29 In person far that am in mind full near,
30 Making light show where I esteem most dear.
31 A malcontent yet seem I pleased still,
32 Bragging of heaven yet feeling pains of hell
33 But Time shall frame a time unto my will,
34 Whenas in sport this earnest will I tell;
35 Till then, sweet friend, abide these storms with me,
36 Which shall in joys of either fortunes be.

DE_VERE_No.13:
1 Whereas the heart at tennis plays, and men to gaming fall,
2 Love is the court, hope is the house, and favour serves the ball.
3 The ball itself is true desert; the line, which measure shows,
4 Is reason, whereon judgment looks how players win or lose.
5 The jetty is deceitful guile, the stopper, jealousy,
6 Which hath Sir Argus’ hundred eyes wherewith to watch and pry.
7 The fault, wherewith fifteen is lost, is want of wit and sense,
8 And he that brings the racket in is double diligence.
9 And lo, the racket is freewill, which makes the ball rebound;
10 And noble beauty is the chase, of every game the ground.
11 But rashness strikes the ball awry, and where is oversight?
12 ‘A bandy ho,’ the people cry, and so the ball takes flight.
13 Now in the end, good-liking proves content the game and gain.
14 Thus in a tennis knit I love, a pleasure mixed with pain.

DE_VERE_No.14:
1 What cunning can express
2 The favour of her face,
3 To whom in this distress
4 I do appeal for grace?
5 A thousand Cupids fly
6 About her gentle eye.
7 From whence each throws a dart,
8 That kindleth soft sweet fire,
9 Within my sighing heart,
10 Possessed by desire;
11 No sweeter life I try,
12 Than in her love to die.
13 The Lily in the field,
14 That glories in his white,
15 For pureness now must yield
16 And render up his right;
17 Heaven pictured in her face
18 Doth promise joy and grace.
19 Fair Cynthia’s silver light,
20 That beats on running streams,
21 Compares not with her white,
22 Whose hairs are all sunbeams;
23 Her virtues so do shine,
24 As day unto mine eyne.
25 With this there is a Red
26 Exceeds the Damask Rose,
27 Which in her cheeks is spread,
28 Whence every favour grows;
29 In sky there is no star
30 That she surmounts not far.
31 When Phoebus from the bed
32 Of Thetis doth arise,
33 The morning, blushing red,
34 In fair carnation wise,
35 He shows it in her face
36 As Queen of every grace.
37 This pleasant Lily white,
38 This taint of roseate red,
39 This Cynthia’s silver light,
40 This sweet fair Dea spread,
41 These sunbeams in mine eye,
42 These beauties make me die.

DE_VERE_No.15:
1 Who taught thee first to sigh, alas, my heart?
2 Who taught thy tongue the woeful words of plaint?
3 Who filled thine eyes with tears of bitter smart?
4 Who gave thee grief and made thy joys so faint?
Love
5 Who first did print with colours pale thy face?
6 Who first did break thy sleeps of quiet rest?
7 Above the rest in Court, who gave thee Grace?
8 Who made thee strive in virtue to be best?
Love
9 In constant troth to bide so firm and sure,
10 To scorn the world, regarding but thy friend,
11 With patient mind each passion to endure,
12 In one desire to settle to thy end?
Love
13 Love then thy choice, wherein such faith doth bind,
14 As nought but death may ever change thy mind.

DE_VERE_No.16:
1 Were I a king I could command content;
2 Were I obscure unknown should be my cares,
3 And were I dead no thought should me torment,
4 Nor words, nor wrongs, nor loves, nor hopes, nor fears;
5 A doubtful choice of these things one to crave,
6 A kingdom or a cottage or a grave.

DE_VERE_No.17:
1 Sitting alone upon my thought, in melancholy mood,
2 In sight of sea, and at my back an ancient hoary wood,
3 I saw a fair young lady come, her secret fears to wail,
4 Clad all in colour of a nun, and covered with a veil.
5 Yet, for the day was clear and calm, I might discern her face,
6 As one might see a damask rose hid under crystal glass.
7 Three times with her soft hand full hard on her left side she knocks,
8 And sighed so sore as might have moved some pity in the rocks.
9 From sighs, and shedding amber tears, into sweet song she brake,
10 When thus the echo answered her to every word she spake.
11 ‘O heavens! Who was the first that bred in me this fever?’
Vere.
12 ‘Who was the first that gave the wound, whose scar I wear for ever?’
Vere.
13 ‘What tyrant Cupid to my harms usurps the golden quiver?’
Vere.
14 ‘What wight first caught this heart, and can from bondage it deliver?’
Vere.
15 ‘Yet who doth most adore this wight, O hollow caves, tell true?’
You.
16 ‘What nymph deserves his liking best, yet doth in sorrow rue?’
You.
17 ‘What makes him not regard good will with some remorse or ruth?’
Youth.
18 ‘What makes him show, besides his birth, such pride and such untruth?’
Youth.
19 ‘May I his beauty match with love, if he my love will try?’
Aye.
20 ‘May I requite his birth with faith? Then faithful will I die?’
Aye.
21 And I, that knew this lady well,
22 Said Lord, how great a miracle,
23 To her how echo told the truth,
24 As true as Phoebus’ oracle.

DE_VERE_No.18:
(see also four additional stanzas in No. 18b, p. 109)
1 My mind to me a kingdom is;
2 Such perfect joy therein I find
3 That it excels all other bliss
4 That world affords or grows by kind.
5 Though much I want which most men have,
6 Yet still my mind forbids to crave.
7 No princely pomp, no wealthy store,
8 No force to win the victory,
9 No wily wit to salve a sore,
10 No shape to feed each gazing eye,
11 To none of these I yield as thrall.
12 For why? My mind doth serve for all.
13 I see how plenty suffers oft,
14 How hasty climbers soon do fall;
15 I see that those that are aloft
16 Mishap doth threaten most of all;
17 They get with toil, they keep with fear.
18 Such cares my mind could never bear.
19 Content I live, this is my stay;
20 I seek no more than may suffice;
21 I press to bear no haughty sway;
22 Look what I lack my mind supplies.
23 Lo, thus I triumph like a king,
24 Content with that my mind doth bring.
25 Some have too much yet still do crave;
26 I little have and seek no more.
27 They are but poor though much they have
28 And I am rich with little store.
29 They poor, I rich; they beg, I give;
30 They lack, I leave; they pine, I live.
31 I laugh not at another’s loss,
32 I grudge not at another’s gain.
33 No worldly waves my mind can toss;
34 My state at one doth still remain.
35 I fear no foe nor fawning friend,
36 I loathe not life nor dread my end.
37 Some weigh their pleasure by their lust,
38 Their wisdom by their rage of will;
39 Their treasure is their only trust,
40 And cloaked craft their store of skill.
41 But all the pleasure that I find,
42 Is to maintain a quiet mind.
43 My wealth is health and perfect ease,
44 My conscience clear my chief defense;
45 I neither seek by bribes to please
46 Nor by deceit to breed offense.
47 Thus do I live, thus will I die.
48 Would all did so as well as I.

DE_VERE_No.18B:
1 I joy not in no earthly bliss,
2 I force not Croesus’ wealth a straw.
3 For care I know not what it is,
4 I fear not Fortune’s fatal law.
5 My mind is such as may not move
6 For beauty bright nor force of love.
7 I wish but what I have at will,
8 I wander not to seek for more.
9 I like the plain, I climb no hill,
10 In greatest storms I sit on shore
11 And laugh at those that toil in vain,
12 To get what must be lost again.
13 I kiss not where I wish to kill,
14 I feign not love where most I hate.
15 I break no sleep to win my will,
16 I wait not at the mighty’s gate.
17 I scorn no poor, nor fear no rich,
18 I feel no want nor have too much.
19 The Court ne cart I like ne loathe,
20 Extremes are counted worst of all.
21 The golden mean betwixt them both
22 Doth surest sit and fear no fall.
23 This is my choice, for why I find
24 No wealth is like the quiet mind.

DE_VERE_No.19:
1 If women could be fair and yet not fond,
2 Or that their love were firm, not fickle still,
3 I would not marvel that they make men bond
4 By service long to purchase their good will.
5 But when I see how frail those creatures are,
6 I muse that men forget themselves so far.
7 To mark the choice they make and how they change,
8 How oft from Phoebus they do flee to Pan;
9 Unsettled still, like haggards wild they range,
10 These gentle birds that fly from man to man.
11 Who would not scorn and shake them from the fist,
12 And let them fly, fair fools, which way they list?
13 Yet for disport we fawn and flatter both,
14 To pass the time when nothing else can please,
15 And train them to our lure with subtle oath,
16 Till weary of their wiles ourselves we ease.
17 And then we say when we their fancy try,
18 To play with fools, oh what a fool was I.

DE_VERE_No.20:
1 In peascod time when hound to horn gives ear while buck is killed,
2 And little boys with pipes of corn sit keeping beasts in field,
3 I went to gather strawberries tho’ when woods and groves were fair,
4 And parched my face with Phoebus, lo, by walking in the air.
5 I lay me down all by a stream and banks all overhead,
6 And there I found the strangest dream, that ever young man had.
7 Methought I saw each Christmas game, both revels all and some,
8 And each thing else that man could name or might by fancy come,
9 The substance of the thing I saw, in silence pass it shall,
10 Because I lack the skill to draw, the order of them all.
11 But Venus shall not ’scape my pen, whose maidens in disdain
12 Sit feeding on the hearts of men, whom Cupid’s bow hath slain.
13 And that blind Boy sat all in blood, bebathed to the ears,
14 And like a conqueror he stood, and scorned lovers’ tears.
15 ‘I have more hearts,’ quoth he, ‘at call, than Caesar could command.
16 ‘And like the deer I make them fall, that overcross the land.
17 ‘I do increase their wand’ring wits, till that I dim their sight.
18 ‘ ’Tis I that do bereave them of their joy and chief delight.’
19 Thus did I see this bragging Boy advance himself even then,
20 Deriding at the wanton toys, of foolish loving men,
21 Which when I saw for anger then my panting breast did beat,
22 To see how he sat taunting them, upon his royal seat.
23 O then I wished I had been free, and cured were my wound;
24 Methought I could display his arms, and coward deeds expound.
25 But I perforce must stay my muse, full sore against my heart,
26 For that I am a subject wight, and lanced with his dart.
27 But if that I achieve the fort, which I have took in charge,
28 My hand and head with quivering quill, shall blaze his name at large.

DE_VERE_No.21:
My Lord, I have understood by your Lordship's letters that Robert Christmas, according to my appointment, hath repaired to your good Lordship about my causes, and as your Lordship thinks good therein, as touching a new survey, so do I determine shall be done; for both as your Lordship perceives, and also myself, I have been greatly abused in the former by such as I put in trust tofore; but for that is past, now I have no other remedy but to look better to amend the fault in the rest of my dealings hereafter, and as for my timber at Colne Park, therein I had no other meaning save only to make, as it were, a yearly rent, so as I may without disparking the ground. But now for the surveyor which your Lordship hath named, I must get him by your Lordship's means and for your Lordship's sake, for I am utterly unacquainted with him.

And as for those large leases which your Lordship hath been advertised of to be granted by me, I do assure your Lordship, without dissembling my faults to you to whom I perceive myself so much to be bound unto for your singular care over my well-doing, I must confess my negligence and too little care, with the too too [sic?] much trust I have put to some over mine own doings; it may be I am greatly abused, but as yet, till I search into those things now, upon your Lordship's most gracious admonitions, I do not know, but it is likelier to be as your Lordship doth guess than otherwise and, if it be not so, it is more by good hap than of my providence.

The device of making free my copyholders, my Lord, I never thought of otherwise than a motion made to me by Robert Christmas wherein, among the other things, I bade him tell it your Lordship, at whose liking or disliking I was to be ruled in anything, knowing if it were a thing fit or unfit for me I should, by your Lordship's good advice, quickly understand, and so I left it to be not done, or taken in hand. And thus, sir, for these matters, both in this as in all other things, I am to be governed and commanded at your Lordship's good devotion.

I would to God your Lordship would let me understand some of your news (which here doth ring doubtfully in the ears of every man) of the murder of the Admiral of France and a number of noblemen and worthy gentlemen, and such as greatly have in their lifetimes honoured the Queen's Majesty our mistress, on whose tragedies we have a number of French Aeneases in this city that tells of their own overthrows with tears falling from their eyes, a piteous thing to hear, but a cruel and far more grievous thing we must deem it then to see. All rumours here are but confused of those troops that are escaped from Paris and Rouen, where Monsieur hath also been and, like a vesper Sicilianus, as they say, that cruelty spreads over all France, whereof your Lordship is better advertised than we are here. And sith the world is so full of treasons and vile instruments daily to attempt new and unlooked for things, good my Lord, I shall affectiously and heartily desire your Lordship to be careful both of yourself and of her Majesty, that your friends may long enjoy you, and you them. I speak because I am not ignorant what practices have been made against your person lately by Mather and later, as I understand, by foreign practices, if it be true. And think, if the Admiral in France was an eyesore or beam in the eyes of the papists, that the Lord Treasurer of England is a block and a cross-bar in their way, whose remove they will never stick to attempt, seeing they have prevailed so well in others'.

This estate hath depended on you a great while, as all the world doth judge; and now all men's eyes, not being occupied any more on these lost lords are, as it were, on a sudden bent and fixed on you, as a singular hope and pillar whereto the religion hath to lean. And blame me not, though I am bolder with your Lordship at this present than my custom is, for I am one that count myself a follower of yours now in all fortunes, and what shall hap to you, I count it hap to myself or, at the least, I will make myself a voluntary partaker of it.

Thus, my Lord, I humbly desire your Lordship to pardon my youth, but to take in good part my zeal and affection towards your Lordship, as on whom I have builded my foundation either to stand or fall. And good my Lord, think I do not this presumptuously, as to advise you that am but to take advice of your Lordship, but to admonish you as one with whom I would spend my blood and life, so much you have made me yours. And I do protest, there is nothing more desired of me than so to be taken and accounted of you. Thus, with my hearty commendations and your daughter's, we leave you to the custody of Almighty God. Your Lordship's affectioned son-in-law.

Edward Oxenford

DE_VERE_No.22:
My very good Lord, I hope it is not out of your remembrance how long sithence I have been a suitor to her Majesty that she would give me leave to try my title to the forest at the law, but I found that so displeasing unto her that, in place of receiving that ordinary favour which is of course granted to the meanest subject, I was browbeaten and had many bitter speeches given me; nevertheless, at length, by means of some of the Lords of the Council, among which your Lordship especially, her Majesty was persuaded to give me ear. At that time, which was at Somerset House (if your Lordship please to call to mind), her Majesty would needs have it committed unto arbitrers, pretending therein to do me especial favour in cutting off the long circumstances of the law and charges pertaining thereto. But after I had consented thereunto, for me could be no other arbiter permitted than the Lord Chancellor, whom she had chosen for herself; this I am assured your Lordship hath good cause to remember by her Majesty's exception against you, in that she thought you partial to your son-in-law. But these things I call only to mind for your Lordship's better remembrance which, through so many affairs, otherwise, in so long a time, it is no marvel if perhaps you have easily forgotten. Therefore I will to purpose only further call to remembrance the success of this arbitrament, which was thus. After much ado, and a good year spent by delays from her Majesty, my Lord Chancellor, then Sir Christopher Hatton, being earnestly called upon, appointed a time of hearing, both for her Majesty's learned counsel at the law and mine, whereupon what he conceived thereby of my title, he was ready to have made his report unto her Majesty. But such was my misfortune (I do not think her mind to do me any wrong), that she flatly refused therein to hear my Lord Chancellor, and for a final answer commanded me no more to follow the suit for, whether it was hers or mine, she was resolved to dispose thereof at her pleasure. A strange sentence, methought, which, being justly considered, I may say she had done me more favour if she had suffered me to try my title at law, than this arbitrament under pretence of expedition and grace; the extremity had been far more safe than the remedy which I was persuaded to accept. But after I had made some complaint of this hard determination, yet in so desperate a state, she promised this relief to my cause that, in some other matter, that should be as commodious as that unto me, she would recompense me in the meanwhile. Hence riseth the cause, my Lord, wherefore I have preferred many suits to her Majesty, but have found in them all the same delays and difficulties that I did in the other before. But now the ground whereon I lay my suit being so just and reasonable that either I should expect some satisfaction by way of recompense, or restoration of mine own (as I am yet persuaded till law hath convinced me), these are most earnestly to desire a continuance of your Lordship's favour and furtherance in my suit which I made at Greenwich to her Majesty, at her last being there, about three commodities, to wit, the oils, wools and fruits, in giving therefor as then my proffer was. I do the rather now renew the same for that I do not hear as yet they are disposed otherwise, and that the time is fittest, as well as for her Majesty's commodity as his that shall take it, and considering (if her Majesty will have a just consideration of the premises) I am to challenge and expect somewhat. Your Lordship knows the whole process of the matter, and can better judge than any other (as to whom my estate is best known, & how hardly I may forbear so great an interest without any recompense) and, therefore, as to the meetest (for that my state and cause, both in right and conscience, is best understood) to conceive of the just desire I make of this suit, I do address myself to your Lordship, most earnestly to crave both your opinion and counsel, your favour and furtherance, whether I were best to follow this suit which I have commenced or, it standing so that there is no good or hope to be done or conceived therein, to seek again her Majesty's favour that I might proceed in law to try my title to the forest. And thus desiring your Lordship to hold me excused for that I am so long in a matter that concerneth me so much, I will make an end, this 25 of October, 1593.

And always rest your Lordship's to command.

Edward Oxenford

DE_VERE_No.23:
Seeing that it hath pleased your Majesty of your most gracious inclination to justice & right to restore me to be keeper of your game as well in your forest of Waltham, as also in Havering Park, I can do no less in duty and love to your Majesty but employ myself in the execution thereof. And to the end you might the better know in what sort both the forest & the park have been abused, and yet continued, as well in destroying of the deer as in spoiling of your demesne wood by such as have patents & had licences heretofore for felling of timber in the Queen's time lately deceased, presuming thereby that they may do what they list, I was bold to send unto your Majesty a man skilful, learned & experienced in forest causes, who being a dweller and eye-witness thereof might inform you of the truth. And because your Majesty upon a bare information could not be so well satisfied of every particular as by lawful testimony & examination of credible witness upon oath, according to your Majesty's appointment by commission a course hath been taken in which your Majesty shall be fully satisficed of truth. This commission, together with the depositions of the witness, I do send to your Majesty by this bearer, who briefly can inform you of the whole contence. So that now, having lawfully proved unto your Majesty that Sir John Gray hath killed and destroyed your deer in Havering Park without any warrant for the same, his patent is void in law, & therefore I most humbly beseech your Majesty to make him an example for all others that shall in like sort abuse their places, & to restore me to the possession thereof, in both which your Majesty shall do but justice and right to the one & other. This 30 of January 1603. Your Majesty's most humble subject and servant, E. Oxenforde.

DE_VERE_No.24:
My very honorable Sir
Sir, I have received your letters, full of humanity and courtesy, and strongly resembling
your great love and singular affection towards me, like true children duly procreated of
such a mother, for whom I find myself from day to day more bound to your honor. Your
good admonishments for the observance of good order according to your appointed rules,
I am resolved (God aiding) to keep with all diligence, as a thing that I may know and
consider to tend especially to my own good and profit, using therein the advice and 
authority of those who are near me, whose discretion I esteem so great (if it is convenient
to me to say something to their advantage) that not only will they comport themselves
according as a given time requires it, but will as well do what is more, as long as I govern
myself as you have ordered and commanded. As to the order of my study, because it
requires a long discourse to explain it in detail, and the time is short at this hour, I pray
you affectionately to excuse me therefrom for the present, assuring you that by the first
passer-by I shall make it known to you at full length. In the meantime, I pray to God to
give you health. Edward Oxinford.

DE_VERE_No.25:
My Lord, having th' opportunity to write by this bearer who departeth from us here in
Padua this night, although I cannot make so large a write as I would gladly desire, yet I
thought it not fit to let so short a time slip, wherefore remembering my commendations to
your good Lordship, these shall be to desire you to pardon the shortness of my letters, and
to impute it at this present to the haste of this messenger's departure.
And as concerning mine own matters, I shall desire your Lordship to make no stay of the
sales of my land, but that all things (according to my determination before I came away,
with those that I appointed last by my servant, William Booth) might go forward
according to mine order taken, without any other alteration.
Thus recommending myself unto your Lordship again, and to my Lady your wife, with
mine, I leave further to trouble your Lordship. From Padua, the 27th of November.
Your Lordship's to command,
Edward Oxenford

DE_VERE_No.26:
My good Lord, having looked for your Lordship's letters a great while, at length when I grew to despair of them I received two from your Lordship.  Three packets which at sundry times I had sent this summer towards England returned back again by reason the plague being in the passages, none were suffered to pass, but as they came were returned back, which I came not to the knowledge of till my return now to Venice, where I have been grieved with a fever.  Yet with the help of God now I have recovered the same and am past the danger thereof, though brought very weak thereby and hindered from a great deal of travel, which grieves me most, fearing my time not sufficient for my desire, for although I have seen so much as sufficeth me, yet would I have time to profit thereby. 
 
Your Lordship seems desirous to know how I like Italy, what is mine intention in travel, and when I mean to return.  For my liking of Italy, my Lord, I am glad I have seen it, and I care not ever to see it any more unless it be to serve my prince or country.  For mine intention to travel, I am desirous to see more of Germany, wherefore I shall desire your Lordship, with my Lord of Leicester, to procure me the next summer to continue my licence, at the end of which I mean undoubtedly to return.  I thought to have seen Spain, but by Italy I guess the worse. 

I have sent one of my servants into England with some new disposition of my things there, wherefore I will not trouble your Lordship in these letters with the same. 
 
If this sickness had not happened unto me, which hath taken away this chiefest time of travel at this present I would not have written for further leave, but to supply the which I doubt not her Majesty will not deny me so small a favour. 
 
By reason of my great charges of travel and sickness I have taken up of Mr Baptisto Nigrone 500 crowns, which I shall desire your Lordship to see there repaid, hoping by this time my money which is made of the sale of my land is all come in. 
 
Likewise I shall desire your Lordship that whereas I had one Luke Atslowe that served, who now is become a lewd subject to her Majesty and an evil member to his country, which had certain leases of me, I do think according to law he leeseth them all to the Queen sith he is become one of the Romish church, and there hath performed all such ceremonies as might reconcile himself to that church, having used lewd speeches against the Queen's Majesty's supremacy, legitimation, government and particular life, and is here, as it were, a practiser upon our nation.  Then this is my desire, that your Lordship, if it be so as I do take it, would procure those leases into my hands again, whereas I have understood by my Lord of Bedford they have hardly dealt with my tenants. 
 
Thus thanking your Lordship for your good news of my wife's delivery, I recommend myself unto your favour, and although I write for a few months more, yet though I have them, so it may fall out I will shorten them myself. 

DE_VERE_No.27:
My Lord, although I have forborne in some respect which I hold private to myself either to write or come unto your Lordship, yet had I determined, as opportunity should have served me, to have accomplished the same in compass of a few days.  But now, urged thereunto by your letters to satisfy you the sooner, I must let your Lordship understand thus much.  That is, until I can better satisfy or advertise myself of some mislikes, I am not determined, as touching my wife, to accompany her.  What they are, because some are not to be spoken of or written upon as imperfections, I will not deal withal.  Some that otherways discontent me, I will not blaze or publish until it please me.  And last of all, I mean not to weary my life any more with such troubles and molestations as I have endured, nor will I, to please your Lordship only, discontent myself.  Wherefore as your Lordship very well writeth unto me that you mean, if it standeth with my liking, to receive her into your house, these are likewise to let your Lordship understand that it doth very well content me; for there, as your daughter or her mother's, more than my wife, you may take comfort of her, and I, rid of the cumber thereby, shall remain well eased of many griefs.  I do not doubt but she hath sufficient proportion for her being to live upon and to maintain herself. 
 
This might have been done through private conference before, and had not needed to have been the fable of the world if you would have had the patience to have understood me, but I do not know by what or whose advice it was to run that course so contrary to my will or meaning which made her disgraced to the world, raised suspicions openly that with private conference might have been more silently handled, and hath given me more greater cause to mislike.  Wherefore I desire your Lordship in these causes (now you shall understand me) not to urge me any farther.  And so I write unto your Lordship, as you have done unto me, this Friday, the 27th of April. 

DE_VERE_No.28:
My very good Lord, yesterday at your Lordship's earnest request I had some conference with you about your daughter, wherein for that her Majesty had so often moved me, and for that you dealt so earnestly with me, to content as much as I could I did agree that you might bring her to the court with condition that she should not come when I was present nor at any time to have speech with me, and further that your Lordship should not urge farther in her cause.  But now I understand that your Lordship means this day to bring her to the court, and that you mean afterward to prosecute the cause with further hope.  Now if your Lordship shall do so, then shall you take more in hand than I have or can promise you.  For always I have and will still prefer mine own content before others', and observing that wherein I may temper or moderate for your sake, I will do most willingly.  Wherefore I shall desire your Lordship not to take advantage of my promise till you have given me some honourable assurance by letter or word of your performance of the condition, which being observed I could yield, as it is my duty, to her Majesty's request, and bear with your fatherly desire towards her.  Otherwise all that is done can stand to none effect. 
 
From my lodging at Charing Cross, this morning. 

DE_VERE_No.29:
My Lord, Robin Christmas did yesterday tell me how honourably you had dealt with her Majesty as touching my liberty, and that as this day she had made promise to your Lordship that it should be, unless your Lordship shall make some to put her Majesty in mind thereof, I fear in these other causes of the two Lords she will forget me, for she is nothing of her own disposition, as I find, so ready to deliver as speedy to commit, and every little trifle gives her matter for a long delay. 

I willed E. Hammond to report unto your Lordship her Majesty's message unto me by Mr Secretary Walsingham, which was to this effect: first, that she would have heard the matter again touching Henry Howard, Southwell and Arundel; then, that she understood I meant to cut down all my woods, especially about my house, which she did not so well like of as if I should sell some land else otherwhere; and last, that she heard that I had been hardly used by some of my servants during this time of my commit, wherein she promised her aid, so far as she could with justice, to redress the loss I had sustained thereby, to which I made answer as I willed Hammond to relate unto your Lordship. 
 
Further, my Lord, whereof I am desirous something to write, I have understood of certain of my men hath resorted unto your Lordship and sought, by false reports of other of their fellows, both to abuse your Lordship and me.  But for that this bearer seems most herein to be touched, I have sent him unto your Lordship, as is his earnest desire, that your Lordship might so know him as your evil opinion, being conceived amiss by these lewd fellows, may be removed.  And truly, my Lord, I hear of those things wherewith he is charged and, I can assure you, wrongfully and slanderously, but the world is so cunning as of a shadow they can make a substance, and of a likelihood a troth.  And these fellows, if they be those which I suppose, I do not doubt but so to decipher them to the world as easily your Lordship shall look into their lewdness and unfaithfulness, which, till my liberty, I mean to defer, as more mindful of that importing me most at this time than yet seeking to revenge myself of such perverse and impudent dealing of servants, which I know have not wanted encouragement and setting on. 
 
But letting these things pass for a while, I must not forget to give your Lordship those thanks which are due to you for this your honourable dealing to her Majesty in my behalf, which I hope shall not be without effect, the which attending from the court, I will take my leave of your Lordship, and rest at your commandment at my house this morning.   

DE_VERE_No.30:
I have been an earnest suitor unto your Lordship for my Lord Lumley, that it would please you for my sake to stand his good Lord and friend which, as I perceive, your Lordship hath already very honourably [performed, for?] the which, [as I?] am in a number of things more than I can reckon bound unto your Lordship, so am I in this likewise, especially for he hath matched with a near kinswoman of mine to whose father I always was beholding unto for his assured and kind disposition unto me.  Further, among all the rest of my blood, this only remains in account either of me or else of them, as your Lordship doth know very well, the rest having embraced further alliances to leave their nearer consanguinity.  And as I hope your Lordship doth account me now one whom you have so much bound as I am to be yours before any else in the world, both through match, whereby [I?] count my greatest stay, and by your Lordship's friendly usage and sticking by me in this time wherein I am hedged in with so many enemies, so likewise I hope your Lordship will take all them for your followers and most at command which are inclined and affected to me.  Wherefore I shall once again be thus bold with your Lordship to be [the more?] importunate in this matter [for?] your Lordship's favour in [easing?] my Lord Lumley's payment to her Majesty, wherein we [shall?] all give your Lordship thanks, and you shall do me as great an honour herein as a profit if it had been to myself, in that through your Lordship's favour I shall be able to pleasure my friend and stand needless of others that have forsaken me.  Thus, for that your Lordship is troubled with many matters where you are, I crave pardon for troubling you.

DE_VERE_No.31:
It is not unknown to your Lordship that I have entered into a great number of bonds to such as have purchased lands of me, to discharge them of all encumbrances, and because I stand indebted unto her Majesty (as your Lordship knoweth), many of the said purchasers do greatly fear some trouble likely to fall upon them by reason of her Majesty's said debt, & especially if the lands of the Lord Darcy and Sir William Waldegrave should be extended for the same, who have two several statutes of great sums for their discharge.  Whereupon many of the said purchasers have been suitors unto me to procure the discharging of her Majesty's said debt, and do seem very willing to bear the burden thereof if by my means the same might be stalled payable at some convenient days. 
 
I have therefore thought good to acquaint your Lordship with this their suit, requiring most earnestly your Lordship's furtherance in this behalf, whereby I shall be unburdened of a great care which I have for the saving of my honour, and shall by this means also unburden my wife's jointure of that charge which might happen hereafter to be imposed upon the same if God should call your Lordship and me away before her. 

My Lord, this other day your man Stainner(?) told me that you sent for Amice, my man, and if he were absent, that Lyly should come unto you.  I sent Amice, for he was in the way.  And I think very strange that your Lordship should enter into that course towards me whereby I must learn that I knew not before, both of your opinion and goodwill towards me.  But I pray, my Lord, leave that course, for I mean not to be your ward nor your child.  I serve her Majesty, and I am that I am, and by alliance near to your Lordship, but free, and scorn to be offered that injury to think I am so weak of government as to be ruled by servants, or not able to govern myself.  If your Lordship take and follow this course, you deceive yourself and make me take another course than yet I have not thought of.  Wherefore these shall be to desire your Lordship, if that I may make account of your friendship, that you will leave that course, as hurtful to us both.
 
DE_VERE_No.32:
My very good Lord.  As I have been beholding unto you divers times, & of late by my brother Robert Cecil, whereby I have been the better able to follow my suit wherein I have some comfort at this time from Mr Secretary Walsingham, so am I now bold to crave your Lordship's help at this present, for being now almost at a point to taste that good which her Majesty shall determine, yet am I one that hath long besieged a fort, and not able to compass the end or reap the fruit of his travail, being forced to levy his siege for want of munition.  Being therefore thus disfurnished and unprovided to follow her Majesty as I perceive she will look for, I most earnestly desire your Lordship that you will lend me 200 pounds till her Majesty performeth her promise, out of which I shall make my payment, if it please you, with the rest that your Lordship hath at sundry times to my great furtherance and help in my causes sent me by your servant and steward Billet. 
 
I would be loath to have troubled your Lordship with so much if I were not kept here back with this tedious suit from London, where I would have found means to have taken up so much to have served my turn till her Majesty had dispatched me, but for that I dare not (having been here so long, and the matter growing to some conclusion) be absent. 
 
I pray your Lordship bear with me, that at this time wherein I am to set myself in order I do become so troublesome.  From the court this morning. 

DE_VERE_No.33:
My very good Lord, where I mortgaged my lease of Aveley to Mr Herdson, and not as yet redeemed, and now, as well for the supply of my present wants as also to have some three hundred pounds of ready money to redeem certain leases at Hedingham which were gotten from me very unreasonably for divers years yet enduring, and are of as good clear yearly value as my said lease of Aveley is, I therefore most earnestly desire your Lordship to signify your liking to me in writing to dispose of the said lease at my pleasure; otherwise, there is not any will deal with me for the same nor for any part thereof, wherein I shall be greatly beholding to your Lordship, as I am in all the rest of my whole estate.  The 5th of August. 

DE_VERE_No.34:
I would have been with your Lordship before this but that I have not had my health.  Nevertheless, Hampton being returned from the country, I have sent him to your Lordship that he may advertise you of his proceedings there. 
 
At Oatlands I think your Lordship remembers a complaint of [  ] Bellingham's son of his mother's putting forth of the castle, which was before anything done, whereupon your Lordship directed a letter unto the sheriff, [  ] whereof, as it seems, Thomas Hampton had dealt with more favour towards her than the letters unto the sheriff imported.  Notwithstanding, I understand Bellingham is gone to the court, encouraged I know not by what friends, to complain, as he did report here in town, not to your Lordship, but to her Majesty's self.  My Lord, it was ever meant that he should have consideration as reason and conscience might afford him.  But sithence he taketh a violent course and refuseth reasonable offers I have sent Hampton to inform your Lordship the state of the man, who hath received heretofore a pardon for three burglaries and stands bound to the good behaviour, which behaviour, for sundry and manifest breaches thereof which I can prove, he hath lost the benefit of his pardon, whereby as lord of the manor by escheat I am to deal with him as he hath given me occasion, and herein I hope her Majesty will have consideration sith the same case hath been seen once in Henry the Seventh's time and one example in this, her Majesty's.  For those things which falls to me by escheat I do not doubt that her Majesty will, against her law, give any ear, or hearken to such wrongful complaint. 
 
Skinner hath been often with me for a composition, upon what points(?) of law Hampton is to inform your Lordship, referring myself wholly to your Lordship who in all my causes I find mine honourable good Lord, and to deal more fatherly than friendly with me, for the which I do acknowledge, and ever will, myself in most especial wise bound. 
 
And whereas there is a lease in Arthur Milles’ hand of the manor and lands of Lavenham, I desire your Lordship to cause him to make over his trust unto my servant Mynne, to whom the other lease is made. 
 
If there be complaints made unto your Lordship (as I doubt not but that there will) against the proceedings of mine officers, I most earnestly desire that there may be some reasonable time appointed for the answering of them because my counsel is not in town, but shall be before or at the beginning of the term to satisfice your Lordship and answer their particular complaints.  London, this 8th of September. 
 

DE_VERE_No.35:
My Lord, I do thank your Lordship for the punishment of Hampton, whose evil dealings towards me, being put in trust with my causes in law, I hope your Lordship will think them sufficient to deserve your disgrace, especially knowing his corruptions, which for the more assured knowledge of your Lordship I have sent unto the parties themselves from whom he hath drawn money to his own behoof, whose confirmations, so soon as they can be brought out of the country, they shall be delivered to your Lordship. 
 
In the mean season I shall most heartily pray your Lordship to persevere in your good favour towards me whereby I may procure redress against this which Amyce hath passed under the great seal by the practice of Hampton's fraudulent devise, as shall appear (if I may have leisure to manifest the same) every day more and more.  The changing of the name of my servant without my privity, and putting in another in trust for himself (as bad, as I understand, as himself), if your Lordship will, may give your Lordship certain knowledge of the deceit.  The cozening of so many tenants of their money and the forfeiting of my lease of Skinner's land do witness enough his corruption.  I know if your Lordship will stand mine honourable good Lord and friend herein by handling this Hampton roughly, and this Amyce so that he be but put in fear, that you may bring them to that order which is reason, that I may enjoy mine own lands, as from the beginning was meant by her Majesty.  And as for this letter of Amyce's which I have returned to your Lordship, both concerning my messages to him and the dealing of my servant, as he reports is most false, wherefore I will refer all to your Lordship, who knows the intent of her Majesty's first meaning to me was far otherwise in the beginning when with this suit of mine she thought to recompense me in some sort for forbearing my suit for the Forest, and can judge how unfaithfully I am dealt withal by these parties. 
 
Which favour if your Lordship shall do for me, then would I gladly break unto your Lordship another matter which I would have done ere this had I not been intercepted by these unlooked for troubles.  And this it is. 
 
Whereas I have heard her Majesty meant to sell unto one Middleton, a merchant, and one Carmarden the demesnes of Denbigh which as I am informed is £230 by yearly rent now as it is, I would be an humble suitor to her Majesty that I might have had this bargain, paying the £8000 as they should have done, accepting for £5000 thereof the pension which she hath given me in the Exchequer, and the other £3000 the next term, or upon such reasonable days as her Majesty would grant me by her favour.
