DE_VERE_No.26:
My good Lord, having looked for your Lordship's letters a great while, at length when I grew to despair of them I received two from your Lordship.  Three packets which at sundry times I had sent this summer towards England returned back again by reason the plague being in the passages, none were suffered to pass, but as they came were returned back, which I came not to the knowledge of till my return now to Venice, where I have been grieved with a fever.  Yet with the help of God now I have recovered the same and am past the danger thereof, though brought very weak thereby and hindered from a great deal of travel, which grieves me most, fearing my time not sufficient for my desire, for although I have seen so much as sufficeth me, yet would I have time to profit thereby. 
 
Your Lordship seems desirous to know how I like Italy, what is mine intention in travel, and when I mean to return.  For my liking of Italy, my Lord, I am glad I have seen it, and I care not ever to see it any more unless it be to serve my prince or country.  For mine intention to travel, I am desirous to see more of Germany, wherefore I shall desire your Lordship, with my Lord of Leicester, to procure me the next summer to continue my licence, at the end of which I mean undoubtedly to return.  I thought to have seen Spain, but by Italy I guess the worse. 

I have sent one of my servants into England with some new disposition of my things there, wherefore I will not trouble your Lordship in these letters with the same. 
 
If this sickness had not happened unto me, which hath taken away this chiefest time of travel at this present I would not have written for further leave, but to supply the which I doubt not her Majesty will not deny me so small a favour. 
 
By reason of my great charges of travel and sickness I have taken up of Mr Baptisto Nigrone 500 crowns, which I shall desire your Lordship to see there repaid, hoping by this time my money which is made of the sale of my land is all come in. 
 
Likewise I shall desire your Lordship that whereas I had one Luke Atslowe that served, who now is become a lewd subject to her Majesty and an evil member to his country, which had certain leases of me, I do think according to law he leeseth them all to the Queen sith he is become one of the Romish church, and there hath performed all such ceremonies as might reconcile himself to that church, having used lewd speeches against the Queen's Majesty's supremacy, legitimation, government and particular life, and is here, as it were, a practiser upon our nation.  Then this is my desire, that your Lordship, if it be so as I do take it, would procure those leases into my hands again, whereas I have understood by my Lord of Bedford they have hardly dealt with my tenants. 
 
Thus thanking your Lordship for your good news of my wife's delivery, I recommend myself unto your favour, and although I write for a few months more, yet though I have them, so it may fall out I will shorten them myself. 

DE_VERE_No.27:
My Lord, although I have forborne in some respect which I hold private to myself either to write or come unto your Lordship, yet had I determined, as opportunity should have served me, to have accomplished the same in compass of a few days.  But now, urged thereunto by your letters to satisfy you the sooner, I must let your Lordship understand thus much.  That is, until I can better satisfy or advertise myself of some mislikes, I am not determined, as touching my wife, to accompany her.  What they are, because some are not to be spoken of or written upon as imperfections, I will not deal withal.  Some that otherways discontent me, I will not blaze or publish until it please me.  And last of all, I mean not to weary my life any more with such troubles and molestations as I have endured, nor will I, to please your Lordship only, discontent myself.  Wherefore as your Lordship very well writeth unto me that you mean, if it standeth with my liking, to receive her into your house, these are likewise to let your Lordship understand that it doth very well content me; for there, as your daughter or her mother's, more than my wife, you may take comfort of her, and I, rid of the cumber thereby, shall remain well eased of many griefs.  I do not doubt but she hath sufficient proportion for her being to live upon and to maintain herself. 
 
This might have been done through private conference before, and had not needed to have been the fable of the world if you would have had the patience to have understood me, but I do not know by what or whose advice it was to run that course so contrary to my will or meaning which made her disgraced to the world, raised suspicions openly that with private conference might have been more silently handled, and hath given me more greater cause to mislike.  Wherefore I desire your Lordship in these causes (now you shall understand me) not to urge me any farther.  And so I write unto your Lordship, as you have done unto me, this Friday, the 27th of April. 

DE_VERE_No.28:
My very good Lord, yesterday at your Lordship's earnest request I had some conference with you about your daughter, wherein for that her Majesty had so often moved me, and for that you dealt so earnestly with me, to content as much as I could I did agree that you might bring her to the court with condition that she should not come when I was present nor at any time to have speech with me, and further that your Lordship should not urge farther in her cause.  But now I understand that your Lordship means this day to bring her to the court, and that you mean afterward to prosecute the cause with further hope.  Now if your Lordship shall do so, then shall you take more in hand than I have or can promise you.  For always I have and will still prefer mine own content before others', and observing that wherein I may temper or moderate for your sake, I will do most willingly.  Wherefore I shall desire your Lordship not to take advantage of my promise till you have given me some honourable assurance by letter or word of your performance of the condition, which being observed I could yield, as it is my duty, to her Majesty's request, and bear with your fatherly desire towards her.  Otherwise all that is done can stand to none effect. 
 
From my lodging at Charing Cross, this morning. 

DE_VERE_No.29:
My Lord, Robin Christmas did yesterday tell me how honourably you had dealt with her Majesty as touching my liberty, and that as this day she had made promise to your Lordship that it should be, unless your Lordship shall make some to put her Majesty in mind thereof, I fear in these other causes of the two Lords she will forget me, for she is nothing of her own disposition, as I find, so ready to deliver as speedy to commit, and every little trifle gives her matter for a long delay. 

I willed E. Hammond to report unto your Lordship her Majesty's message unto me by Mr Secretary Walsingham, which was to this effect: first, that she would have heard the matter again touching Henry Howard, Southwell and Arundel; then, that she understood I meant to cut down all my woods, especially about my house, which she did not so well like of as if I should sell some land else otherwhere; and last, that she heard that I had been hardly used by some of my servants during this time of my commit, wherein she promised her aid, so far as she could with justice, to redress the loss I had sustained thereby, to which I made answer as I willed Hammond to relate unto your Lordship. 
 
Further, my Lord, whereof I am desirous something to write, I have understood of certain of my men hath resorted unto your Lordship and sought, by false reports of other of their fellows, both to abuse your Lordship and me.  But for that this bearer seems most herein to be touched, I have sent him unto your Lordship, as is his earnest desire, that your Lordship might so know him as your evil opinion, being conceived amiss by these lewd fellows, may be removed.  And truly, my Lord, I hear of those things wherewith he is charged and, I can assure you, wrongfully and slanderously, but the world is so cunning as of a shadow they can make a substance, and of a likelihood a troth.  And these fellows, if they be those which I suppose, I do not doubt but so to decipher them to the world as easily your Lordship shall look into their lewdness and unfaithfulness, which, till my liberty, I mean to defer, as more mindful of that importing me most at this time than yet seeking to revenge myself of such perverse and impudent dealing of servants, which I know have not wanted encouragement and setting on. 
 
But letting these things pass for a while, I must not forget to give your Lordship those thanks which are due to you for this your honourable dealing to her Majesty in my behalf, which I hope shall not be without effect, the which attending from the court, I will take my leave of your Lordship, and rest at your commandment at my house this morning.   

DE_VERE_No.30:
I have been an earnest suitor unto your Lordship for my Lord Lumley, that it would please you for my sake to stand his good Lord and friend which, as I perceive, your Lordship hath already very honourably [performed, for?] the which, [as I?] am in a number of things more than I can reckon bound unto your Lordship, so am I in this likewise, especially for he hath matched with a near kinswoman of mine to whose father I always was beholding unto for his assured and kind disposition unto me.  Further, among all the rest of my blood, this only remains in account either of me or else of them, as your Lordship doth know very well, the rest having embraced further alliances to leave their nearer consanguinity.  And as I hope your Lordship doth account me now one whom you have so much bound as I am to be yours before any else in the world, both through match, whereby [I?] count my greatest stay, and by your Lordship's friendly usage and sticking by me in this time wherein I am hedged in with so many enemies, so likewise I hope your Lordship will take all them for your followers and most at command which are inclined and affected to me.  Wherefore I shall once again be thus bold with your Lordship to be [the more?] importunate in this matter [for?] your Lordship's favour in [easing?] my Lord Lumley's payment to her Majesty, wherein we [shall?] all give your Lordship thanks, and you shall do me as great an honour herein as a profit if it had been to myself, in that through your Lordship's favour I shall be able to pleasure my friend and stand needless of others that have forsaken me.  Thus, for that your Lordship is troubled with many matters where you are, I crave pardon for troubling you.

DE_VERE_No.31:
It is not unknown to your Lordship that I have entered into a great number of bonds to such as have purchased lands of me, to discharge them of all encumbrances, and because I stand indebted unto her Majesty (as your Lordship knoweth), many of the said purchasers do greatly fear some trouble likely to fall upon them by reason of her Majesty's said debt, & especially if the lands of the Lord Darcy and Sir William Waldegrave should be extended for the same, who have two several statutes of great sums for their discharge.  Whereupon many of the said purchasers have been suitors unto me to procure the discharging of her Majesty's said debt, and do seem very willing to bear the burden thereof if by my means the same might be stalled payable at some convenient days. 
 
I have therefore thought good to acquaint your Lordship with this their suit, requiring most earnestly your Lordship's furtherance in this behalf, whereby I shall be unburdened of a great care which I have for the saving of my honour, and shall by this means also unburden my wife's jointure of that charge which might happen hereafter to be imposed upon the same if God should call your Lordship and me away before her. 

My Lord, this other day your man Stainner(?) told me that you sent for Amice, my man, and if he were absent, that Lyly should come unto you.  I sent Amice, for he was in the way.  And I think very strange that your Lordship should enter into that course towards me whereby I must learn that I knew not before, both of your opinion and goodwill towards me.  But I pray, my Lord, leave that course, for I mean not to be your ward nor your child.  I serve her Majesty, and I am that I am, and by alliance near to your Lordship, but free, and scorn to be offered that injury to think I am so weak of government as to be ruled by servants, or not able to govern myself.  If your Lordship take and follow this course, you deceive yourself and make me take another course than yet I have not thought of.  Wherefore these shall be to desire your Lordship, if that I may make account of your friendship, that you will leave that course, as hurtful to us both.
 
DE_VERE_No.32:
My very good Lord.  As I have been beholding unto you divers times, & of late by my brother Robert Cecil, whereby I have been the better able to follow my suit wherein I have some comfort at this time from Mr Secretary Walsingham, so am I now bold to crave your Lordship's help at this present, for being now almost at a point to taste that good which her Majesty shall determine, yet am I one that hath long besieged a fort, and not able to compass the end or reap the fruit of his travail, being forced to levy his siege for want of munition.  Being therefore thus disfurnished and unprovided to follow her Majesty as I perceive she will look for, I most earnestly desire your Lordship that you will lend me 200 pounds till her Majesty performeth her promise, out of which I shall make my payment, if it please you, with the rest that your Lordship hath at sundry times to my great furtherance and help in my causes sent me by your servant and steward Billet. 
 
I would be loath to have troubled your Lordship with so much if I were not kept here back with this tedious suit from London, where I would have found means to have taken up so much to have served my turn till her Majesty had dispatched me, but for that I dare not (having been here so long, and the matter growing to some conclusion) be absent. 
 
I pray your Lordship bear with me, that at this time wherein I am to set myself in order I do become so troublesome.  From the court this morning. 

DE_VERE_No.33:
My very good Lord, where I mortgaged my lease of Aveley to Mr Herdson, and not as yet redeemed, and now, as well for the supply of my present wants as also to have some three hundred pounds of ready money to redeem certain leases at Hedingham which were gotten from me very unreasonably for divers years yet enduring, and are of as good clear yearly value as my said lease of Aveley is, I therefore most earnestly desire your Lordship to signify your liking to me in writing to dispose of the said lease at my pleasure; otherwise, there is not any will deal with me for the same nor for any part thereof, wherein I shall be greatly beholding to your Lordship, as I am in all the rest of my whole estate.  The 5th of August. 

DE_VERE_No.34:
I would have been with your Lordship before this but that I have not had my health.  Nevertheless, Hampton being returned from the country, I have sent him to your Lordship that he may advertise you of his proceedings there. 
 
At Oatlands I think your Lordship remembers a complaint of [  ] Bellingham's son of his mother's putting forth of the castle, which was before anything done, whereupon your Lordship directed a letter unto the sheriff, [  ] whereof, as it seems, Thomas Hampton had dealt with more favour towards her than the letters unto the sheriff imported.  Notwithstanding, I understand Bellingham is gone to the court, encouraged I know not by what friends, to complain, as he did report here in town, not to your Lordship, but to her Majesty's self.  My Lord, it was ever meant that he should have consideration as reason and conscience might afford him.  But sithence he taketh a violent course and refuseth reasonable offers I have sent Hampton to inform your Lordship the state of the man, who hath received heretofore a pardon for three burglaries and stands bound to the good behaviour, which behaviour, for sundry and manifest breaches thereof which I can prove, he hath lost the benefit of his pardon, whereby as lord of the manor by escheat I am to deal with him as he hath given me occasion, and herein I hope her Majesty will have consideration sith the same case hath been seen once in Henry the Seventh's time and one example in this, her Majesty's.  For those things which falls to me by escheat I do not doubt that her Majesty will, against her law, give any ear, or hearken to such wrongful complaint. 
 
Skinner hath been often with me for a composition, upon what points(?) of law Hampton is to inform your Lordship, referring myself wholly to your Lordship who in all my causes I find mine honourable good Lord, and to deal more fatherly than friendly with me, for the which I do acknowledge, and ever will, myself in most especial wise bound. 
 
And whereas there is a lease in Arthur Milles’ hand of the manor and lands of Lavenham, I desire your Lordship to cause him to make over his trust unto my servant Mynne, to whom the other lease is made. 
 
If there be complaints made unto your Lordship (as I doubt not but that there will) against the proceedings of mine officers, I most earnestly desire that there may be some reasonable time appointed for the answering of them because my counsel is not in town, but shall be before or at the beginning of the term to satisfice your Lordship and answer their particular complaints.  London, this 8th of September. 
 

DE_VERE_No.35:
My Lord, I do thank your Lordship for the punishment of Hampton, whose evil dealings towards me, being put in trust with my causes in law, I hope your Lordship will think them sufficient to deserve your disgrace, especially knowing his corruptions, which for the more assured knowledge of your Lordship I have sent unto the parties themselves from whom he hath drawn money to his own behoof, whose confirmations, so soon as they can be brought out of the country, they shall be delivered to your Lordship. 
 
In the mean season I shall most heartily pray your Lordship to persevere in your good favour towards me whereby I may procure redress against this which Amyce hath passed under the great seal by the practice of Hampton's fraudulent devise, as shall appear (if I may have leisure to manifest the same) every day more and more.  The changing of the name of my servant without my privity, and putting in another in trust for himself (as bad, as I understand, as himself), if your Lordship will, may give your Lordship certain knowledge of the deceit.  The cozening of so many tenants of their money and the forfeiting of my lease of Skinner's land do witness enough his corruption.  I know if your Lordship will stand mine honourable good Lord and friend herein by handling this Hampton roughly, and this Amyce so that he be but put in fear, that you may bring them to that order which is reason, that I may enjoy mine own lands, as from the beginning was meant by her Majesty.  And as for this letter of Amyce's which I have returned to your Lordship, both concerning my messages to him and the dealing of my servant, as he reports is most false, wherefore I will refer all to your Lordship, who knows the intent of her Majesty's first meaning to me was far otherwise in the beginning when with this suit of mine she thought to recompense me in some sort for forbearing my suit for the Forest, and can judge how unfaithfully I am dealt withal by these parties. 
 
Which favour if your Lordship shall do for me, then would I gladly break unto your Lordship another matter which I would have done ere this had I not been intercepted by these unlooked for troubles.  And this it is. 
 
Whereas I have heard her Majesty meant to sell unto one Middleton, a merchant, and one Carmarden the demesnes of Denbigh which as I am informed is £230 by yearly rent now as it is, I would be an humble suitor to her Majesty that I might have had this bargain, paying the £8000 as they should have done, accepting for £5000 thereof the pension which she hath given me in the Exchequer, and the other £3000 the next term, or upon such reasonable days as her Majesty would grant me by her favour.